SCHOOLGRID / ADVANCED PROGRAMMING

Discovering
Domain-Driven
Design

Business rules, TDD, and Clean Architecture

A running-example learning journey from a school calendar to an architectural model.

Student edition

THE THREAD

Listen to the business  Test the rule  Discover the model  Protect it

Kasozi Vincent  September 7, 2026
START HERE

One school. One problem. 44 decisions.

This book begins with a school trying to build a trustworthy academic calendar. Technical ideas appear
only when the story creates a reason for them.

    THE LEARNING LOOP

    Listen             Example                       Test                                Model    Refine

BUSINESS                                   MODEL                                         ARCHITECTURE

Start with the rule                        Discover responsibility                       Protect the model

Clarify what must be true before choosing  Let examples reveal value, identity, consis-  Add boundaries only when the running sys-
technical structure.                       tency, and collaboration.                     tem actually needs them.

Not a pattern catalogue. Not a folder recipe. Not a code tour. The sequence is cumulative: each step should make the next abstraction feel
necessary.

Running context SchoolGrid / Academic calendar / 2026 teaching scenario

YOUR ROUTE THROUGH SCHOOLGRID

The learning map

Every step answers a question created by the step before it. Concepts sit underneath the step where they become
useful.

TRACK 01 / Start with the business

    The School Calendar Problem

01  Problem framing · scope · acceptable calendar                                                         p. 1

    Discovering Business Rules

02  Rules · assumptions · boundary cases                                                                  p. 5

    From Examples to Tests

03  TDD · red-green-refactor · observable behaviour                                                       p. 12

    Domain, Experts, and Ubiquitous Language

04  Domain · domain expert · ubiquitous language                                                          p. 18

    From Rules to a Domain Model

05  Model · responsibility · behaviour over data                                                          p. 25

TRACK 02 / Build the smallest domain concepts

    Value Objects

06  DateRange · equality by value · invariant                                                             p. 34

    Value Object Behaviour

07  Immutability · duration · inclusion · overlap                                                         p. 41

    Making Invalid Values Impossible

08  TermNumber · constrained values · primitives                                                          p. 50
    Entities: When Identity Matters                                        iii

09  Entity · identity · continuity                                      p. 58
                                                                        p. 66
    Entity State and Behaviour
                                                                        p. 76
10  State transition · encapsulation · intention-revealing methods      p. 85
                                                                        p. 93
TRACK 03 / Discover aggregates through pressure                        p. 102
                                                                       p. 113
    When Valid Objects Become Invalid Together
                                                                       p. 114
11  Cross-object rule · consistency problem                            p. 115
                                                                       p. 116
    Aggregates                                                         p. 117
                                                                       p. 118
12  Aggregate · consistency boundary
                                                                       p. 119
    The Aggregate Root                                                 p. 120
                                                                       p. 121
13  Aggregate root · controlled access                                 p. 122
                                                                       p. 123
    Aggregate Invariants
                                                                       p. 124
14  Uniqueness · ordering · non-overlap · calendar boundary            p. 125

    Transactional Consistency

15  Atomic change · transaction boundary · concurrency question

TRACK 04 / Complete the domain model

    Domain Services

16  Domain service · stateless domain operation · misplaced behaviour

    Factories

17  Creation policy · valid construction · factory tradeoff

    Domain Events

18  Past-tense fact · domain event · side effects

    Repositories

19  Aggregate persistence · repository abstraction

    Repository Boundaries

20  Aggregate root repository · DAO contrast · projections

TRACK 05 / Move from domain to use cases

    A User Wants to Schedule a Term

21  Use case · orchestration · request flow

    Application Services

22  Application service · coordination · transaction orchestration

    Commands and Input Models

23  Command · input model · intent

    DTOs

24  DTO · boundary data · domain-object separation

    Queries and Read Models

25  Query model · projection · read optimisation

TRACK 06 / Introduce Clean Architecture naturally

    The Architecture Problem

26  Technical pressure · policy protection

    Clean Architecture

27  Dependency rule · policy centre · boundaries
iv

    The Domain Layer

28  Domain model · enterprise rules                                 p. 126
                                                                    p. 127
    The Application Layer                                           p. 128
                                                                    p. 129
29  Use cases · orchestration · ports
                                                                    p. 130
    The Infrastructure Layer                                        p. 131
                                                                    p. 132
30  Adapters · persistence · external systems                       p. 133

    The Presentation Layer                                          p. 134
                                                                    p. 135
31  Inbound adapter · request translation · response mapping        p. 136
                                                                    p. 137
TRACK 07 / Control dependency direction                             p. 138

    The Dependency Rule                                             p. 139
                                                                    p. 140
32  Source dependency · runtime flow · inward direction             p. 141
                                                                    p. 142
    Dependency Inversion Through the Repository

33  Abstraction · injection · composition root

    Why the Domain Does Not Know the Database

34  Persistence ignorance · mapping · Active Record contrast

    Walking Through the Entire Request

35  End-to-end use case · success · rejection · commit failure

TRACK 08 / TDD across the architecture

    Testing Value Objects

36  Boundary tests · properties · focused feedback

    Testing Entities and Aggregates

37  Invariant tests · state preservation · identity

    Testing Application Use Cases

38  Fake repository · test doubles · orchestration

    Testing Infrastructure Separately

39  Integration test · transaction · concurrency · mapping

    Different Tests Answer Different Questions

40  Test boundary · risk · confidence

TRACK 09 / Put the whole system together

    One Business Rule Through Every Layer

41  Rule traceability · authoritative policy · feedback

    DDD vs Clean Architecture vs TDD

42  Model meaning · dependency design · development feedback

    Common Misunderstandings

43  Pattern checklist traps · repository myths · service confusion

    The Complete SchoolGrid Mental Model

44  Synthesis · tradeoffs · model evolution
TRACK 01 / Start with the business, not the architecture
STEP 1

The School Calendar Problem

What you will discover

Explain why SchoolGrid needs more than date storage, follow a calendar change from request
to decision, and distinguish an established school rule from an assumption.

       Before there is software, there is a calendar

Before a new academic year begins, a school publishes dates that people will plan around. Teachers
prepare schemes of work, families plan around opening and closing dates, and administrators coor-
dinate activities that depend on the term calendar. Once those dates are circulated, changing them
carelessly creates real confusion.

Our fictional school wants to move this work into SchoolGrid. The first capability is deliberately small:
maintain the dates of the academic year and allow an administrator to change them without leaving the
calendar in a state the school considers impossible.

For the 2026 teaching scenario, the school currently has this calendar:

Term Opens                  Closes

Term 1  1 January 2026      28 March 2026
Term 2  1 May 2026          28 July 2026
Term 3  1 September 2026    28 November 2026

These dates are part of the running example, not an official school calendar. At this point, the simplest
Python we need is equally modest:

     PYTHON

     1 from datetime import date

         2

     3 term_2_start = date(2026, 5, 1)
     4 term_2_end = date(2026, 7, 28)

The code records two dates. That is useful, but it does not yet tell us what the school permits us to do
with them.

Then a real change arrives

A few weeks before Term 2, the headteacher asks for an earlier opening date. The administrator must        DDD CONCEPT
decide whether the change can be accepted before a revised calendar is circulated.
                                                                                                           Domain expert
                                                                   1
                                                                                                           Someone who understands
                                                                                                           how the work is actually done
                                                                                                           and can explain the rules the
                                                                                                           software must respect. Here,
                                                                                                           the school administrator
                                                                                                           provides that knowledge.
2  Step 1. The School Calendar Problem

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Moving Term 2 earlier

      School administrator / Developer

     SA School administrator
    The headteacher wants Term 2 to open on 15 April instead of 1 May. Its closing date
    stays 28 July. Can SchoolGrid make that change?

                          DEV Developer
                         I can replace the start date. Before I do, what would make an earlier date unacceptable?

     SA School administrator
    It cannot fall inside Term 1. Term 1 runs through 28 March.

                          DEV Developer
                         So if someone entered 20 March, we reject the change?

     SA School administrator
    Yes. And we keep the existing Term 2 dates. A bad request must not damage the
    calendar we already have.

                          DEV Developer
                        What about 28 March itself?

     SA School administrator
    That is still a Term 1 day. Term 2 must start after it.

Now the requested change can be represented:

     PYTHON

     1 proposed_start = date(2026, 4, 15)

Nothing about that line tells us whether 15 April is acceptable. To answer the school's question, we
also need information from the neighbouring term:

     PYTHON

     1 term_1_end = date(2026, 3, 28)

         2

     3 proposed_start > term_1_end # True

The comparison is not a complete scheduling implementation. It simply makes the newly discovered
relationship visible: changing Term 2 requires us to consider where Term 1 ends.

      Model evolution
      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Replace one stored date.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING
                                                                                                                                             3
Decide whether the proposed change is allowed in the calendar it belongs to.

The boundary tells us more than the dates do

The administrator's answer about 28 March settles an important edge case. If Term 1 includes its                                                READING CUE
closing day, then these two proposals are different:
                                                                                                                                                Boundary case
PYTHON                                           # reject
                                                 # clears this rule                                                                             An example at the exact point
  1 start_on_28_march = date(2026, 3, 28)                                                                                                       where an outcome changes.
  2 start_on_29_march = date(2026, 3, 29)                                                                                                       Here, 28 March is rejected
                                                                                                                                                while a later date may be
Python considers both values valid dates. The school distinguishes them because of what those dates                                             acceptable.
mean in the academic calendar.

CONTRAST

Valid Python value                               Acceptable calendar change
                                                 Starting Term 2 on 28 March is rejected because
date(2026, 3, 28) is a perfectly valid date ob-  that day still belongs to Term 1.
ject.

KEY IDEA The software must understand relationships between the school's data, not merely store
individually valid values.

Keep the first problem small

SchoolGrid may eventually manage students, teachers, fees, attendance, examinations, and timetables.
None of those are needed to answer today's question.

IN THIS SLICE                                    OUTSIDE FOR NOW                                                                                MODELLING

One academic year, its numbered terms, their     Students, teachers, subjects, fees, attendance,                                                Scope
opening and closing dates, and requests to       examinations, lesson timetables, and distribution
change those dates.                              of the published calendar.                                                                     The part of the real-world
                                                                                                                                                problem we deliberately
                                                                                                                                                choose to model now.
                                                                                                                                                Everything else is deferred,
                                                                                                                                                not declared unimportant.

A narrow first slice keeps the business decision visible. We can expand the system later when another
requirement creates a reason to do so.

Some answers are known; others are still guesses

The conversation gave us one clear rule: Term 2 must begin after Term 1's final day. It did not answer
every calendar question.

                                                                                                                                                READING CUE

                                                                                                                                                Assumption

                                                                                                                                                Something we currently
                                                                                                                                                believe but have not
                                                                                                                                                confirmed with the people
                                                                                                                                                who own the business rule.
                                                                                                                                                An assumption must not
                                                                                                                                                quietly become policy.
4                                                                  Step 1. The School Calendar Problem

   DOMAIN EVIDENCE SO FAR

   ESTABLISHED                    ASSUMPTION                       OPEN QUESTION

   Term dates can be changed af-  All three terms must be config-  May an administrator save an
   ter they have been entered.    ured at the same time.           academic year while only Term 1
                                                                   is scheduled?
   Term 2 must start after Term   Every term must finish inside    May Term 3 continue into January
   1's closing day.               the same calendar year.          of the following year?
   A rejected request must leave  Every school using School-       Is three terms a permanent
   the accepted calendar un-      Grid will always have exactly    SchoolGrid rule or only this
   changed.                       three terms.                     school's current arrangement?

This distinction matters. A programmer can implement an assumption perfectly and still produce the
wrong system.

     Try the decision before designing the model

   Try it: What do we know, and what must we ask?

   Use the original 2026 calendar and consider these requests:
   1. Move the opening of Term 2 to 25 March 2026.
   2. Move the opening of Term 2 to 29 March 2026.
   3. Move the closing of Term 3 to 15 January 2027.
   For each request, state whether the information in this step is enough to decide. If it is, give the
   established reason. If it is not, write the question you would ask the school. Do not invent a rule
   to fill the gap.

   NEXT QUESTION

   We now have examples of accepted, rejected, and unresolved changes. How do we turn those
   examples into precise rules the software can enforce?

   Next: Step 2 ­ Discovering Business Rules
TRACK 01 / Start with the business, not the architecture
STEP 2

Discovering Business Rules

      What you will discover

     Turn concrete calendar examples into precise business rules, distinguish a rule from an assump-
     tion, and use boundary cases to expose what a vague requirement has not yet said.

At the end of Step 1, we could answer some calendar questions but not all of them. Moving Term 2 to
25 March was clearly wrong because Term 1 was still in progress. Moving it to 29 March cleared that
particular conflict. Extending Term 3 into January 2027 remained unresolved.
The next task is not to design classes. It is to replace those partial answers with rules precise enough
that two people looking at the same proposal should reach the same decision.

       Start with the smallest relationship

Before discussing three terms together, the developer asks about the two dates that describe a single
period. A period can be wrong even when no other term is involved.

       DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Can a period be wrong by itself?

      School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         Suppose someone enters 20 May as the opening date and 1 May as the closing date. No
                         other term is involved yet. Should SchoolGrid accept it?

     SA School administrator
    M-2.1 No. A term cannot close before it opens.

                          DEV Developer
                        What if the opening and closing dates are both 20 May?

     SA School administrator
    M-2.2 That is not backwards. Do not reject it merely because the two dates are equal.

That answer gives us our first general rule.                                                                  BUSINESS RULE

      Rule BR-2.1: A period cannot run backwards                                                              Business rule

     For a proposed period, the closing date must be on or after the opening date.                            A statement about what the
      Business evidence: M-2.1 and M-2.2.                                                                     business permits, requires, or
                                                                                                              forbids. It should be precise
                                                                   5                                          enough to decide concrete
                                                                                                              examples consistently.
                                 6                                                    Step 2. Discovering Business Rules

BUSINESS LANGUAGE                The wording matters. "After" would reject equal dates; "on or after" does not. At this level, the two
                                 boundaries are inclusive: the opening day and closing day both belong to the period.
Inclusive boundary
                                       Example: Three ways to probe the chronology rule
A boundary date belongs to
the period itself. If the start       Given we are checking only the relationship between a proposed opening and closing date.
and end are the same date,            When the dates are 1 May­28 July, 20 May­1 May, and 20 May­20 May.
the period contains that one          Then the first is chronological, the second violates BR-2.1, and the third does not violate that
day.                                  rule.

                                 A same-day period passing this rule does not prove that a one-day school term is sensible. It proves
                                 only that equality is not a chronology error. If the school later introduces a minimum term length, that
                                 would be a different rule.

                                    CONTRAST

                                    A rule                                            An example
                                    The closing date must be on or after the opening  20 May­1 May is rejected because it violates that
                                    date.                                             rule.

                                 The rule is general. The example gives us evidence that we have understood how the rule behaves at
                                 a particular point.

                                        Now settle what a term number means

                                 The first calendar happened to show Terms 1, 2 and 3. Step 1 deliberately did not turn that observation
                                 into a rule. The developer now asks directly.

                                         DOMAIN WORKSHOP

                                      Do all three terms have to exist immediately?

                                       School administrator / Developer

                                                           DEV Developer
                                                          For this SchoolGrid calendar, what term numbers are allowed?

                                      SA School administrator
                                     M-2.3 Term 1, Term 2 and Term 3. Those are the three positions in our academic year.

                                                           DEV Developer
                                                          Must I enter all three before I can save the year?

                                      SA School administrator
                                     M-2.4 No. We normally configure the year progressively. We may enter Term 1 first and
                                     add the others as their dates are confirmed.

                                                           DEV Developer
                                                          And if Term 2 already exists, may I add another Term 2 with different dates?
                                                                                             7

     SA School administrator
    M-2.5 No. Change the existing Term 2. Do not create a second one.

Three distinct decisions have appeared. They should not be collapsed into the vague statement "the
school has three terms."

      Rule BR-2.2: Only the three term numbers are valid

     In this SchoolGrid teaching scenario, a term number must be 1, 2, or 3.
      Business evidence: M-2.3.

Rule BR-2.3: A term number occurs at most once

Within one academic year, there may not be two scheduled terms with the same term number.
Business evidence: M-2.5.

Rule BR-2.4: The year may be configured progressively

An academic year does not need all three terms scheduled at every moment. The administrator
may save the year while only part of the calendar has been configured.
Business evidence: M-2.4.

This is an important distinction. "Only 1, 2 and 3 are valid term numbers" is not the same statement as        MODELLING
"all three must already exist."
                                                                                                               Progressive configuration
      Example: A calendar still being prepared
                                                                                                               A valid working state may be
     Given Academic Year 2026 currently contains only Term 1.                                                  incomplete because the
     When the administrator saves the calendar before Term 2 and Term 3 dates have been con-                   business intentionally adds
     firmed.                                                                                                   information over time.
     Then the year is not rejected merely because two permitted term numbers have not yet been                 Incomplete does not
     scheduled.                                                                                                automatically mean invalid.

       A term must also fit the year around it

We can now return to the unresolved request from Step 1: Term 3 opens on 1 September 2026 but is
changed to close on 15 January 2027.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Can a term cross into the next calendar year?

       School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         If Academic Year 2026 has a Term 3 that closes on 15 January 2027, should SchoolGrid
                         accept it?
8  Step 2. Discovering Business Rules

     SA School administrator
    M-2.6 Not in this system. When we configure the 2026 academic year, its term dates
    must stay in 2026.

                          DEV Developer
                         Is that a universal rule for every school?

     SA School administrator
    No. It is the policy we are using for this SchoolGrid calendar. Do not generalise it beyond
    that.

That last sentence is as important as the rule itself. Domain rules belong to a particular business
context; we should not quietly promote a local policy into a law of schooling.

      Rule BR-2.5: Scheduled term dates stay inside the academic year's calendar year

     For the SchoolGrid teaching policy, every scheduled opening and closing date for Academic
     Year 2026 must fall within calendar year 2026.
      Business evidence: M-2.6; this is a local SchoolGrid policy.

      Example: Crossing the year boundary

     Given Term 3 opens on 1 September 2026.
     When its proposed closing date is 15 January 2027.
     Then the proposal is rejected by BR-2.5.

       Valid periods can still form an invalid calendar

We now know how to judge a period by itself and how to keep it inside the named year. Neither rule
tells us how two different terms may sit beside each other.
Step 1 already exposed one boundary: Term 1 closes on 28 March, and Term 2 may not begin on that
same date. The developer pushes the idea further.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     How must the terms relate to one another?

       School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         Suppose every term has sensible dates and all dates are in 2026. Can the calendar still
                         be wrong?

     SA School administrator
    M-2.7 Yes. Term 1 must come before Term 2, and Term 2 before Term 3. They must not
    overlap.

                          DEV Developer
                         If Term 1 closes on 28 March and Term 2 opens on 28 March, is that overlap?
                                                                                                    9

 SA School administrator
M-2.8 Yes. The closing day still belongs to Term 1. Term 2 must begin later.

                      DEV Developer
                    What if Term 2 is September to November and Term 3 is May to July? They do not
                    overlap.

 SA School administrator
Still wrong. The numbering describes their order in the year.

A useful way to state both decisions precisely is to compare an earlier-numbered term with a later-
numbered term.

      Rule BR-2.6: Earlier-numbered terms must finish before later-numbered terms begin

     If two terms are scheduled and one has the lower term number, its closing date must be strictly
     before the later term's opening date.
      Business evidence: M-2.7 and M-2.8.

Because boundaries are inclusive, "strictly before" is essential. A Term 1 closing on 28 March and a
Term 2 opening on 28 March would share that day and therefore violate BR-2.6.

      Example: The boundary between Term 1 and Term 2

     Given Term 1 closes on 28 March 2026.
     When Term 2 is proposed to open on 28 March and then on 29 March.
     Then 28 March is rejected because the terms would share a day; 29 March clears this particular
     rule.

Example: No overlap, but the numbering is backwards

Given Term 2 is proposed for 1 September­28 November and Term 3 for 1 May­28 July.
When the calendar is checked.
Then it is rejected because Term 2 does not finish before Term 3 begins, even though the two
periods do not overlap.

The second example is a counterexample to the idea that "non-overlapping" alone is enough.             DISCOVERY TOOL

       A rejected change must not become a partial change                                              Counterexample

One final decision was already present in the Step 1 conversation. If an administrator proposes an     A concrete case that satisfies
invalid reschedule, SchoolGrid should reject the proposal without damaging the dates that were previ-  a proposed explanation but
ously accepted.                                                                                        still produces the wrong
                                                                                                       business outcome. It shows
      Rule BR-2.7: Rejecting a change preserves the accepted calendar                                  that the explanation is
                                                                                                       incomplete.

If a proposed schedule or reschedule violates a calendar rule, the proposal is rejected and the
previously accepted term dates remain unchanged.

For now this is a business requirement, not an implementation technique. Later we will discover what
10                                                               Step 2. Discovering Business Rules
kind of model makes that guarantee easy to protect.

       The vague requirement is now a decision table

The original request sounded simple: "let the administrator manage term dates." We can now ask much
sharper questions.

Proposal                   Reason                                Decision
20 May­1 May               Period runs backwards
20 May­20 May              Does not violate chronology           Reject
                                                                 Not rejected by that
Only Term 1 scheduled      Progressive configuration is allowed  rule
Term 3 closes 15 Jan 2027  Outside Academic Year 2026 policy     Acceptable state
Term 2 opens 28 Mar        Shares Term 1's closing day           Reject
Term 2 opens 29 Mar        Clears the Term 1 boundary rule       Reject
                                                                 Check remaining
Second Term 2 added        Duplicate term number                 rules
                                                                 Reject

Notice the wording in the right-hand column. Passing one rule does not always mean the whole proposal
is valid. "29 March clears the Term 1 boundary rule" is more precise than saying "29 March is valid."
Other rules may still matter.

      KEY IDEA Business rules become useful when they let us explain both acceptance and rejection
      with the same vocabulary.

Try it: Challenge the rules with new examples

For each proposal below, identify the rule that decides it. If no single rule is enough, say what
else must be checked.
1. Term 1 opens and closes on 10 January 2026.
2. Term 2 is scheduled before Term 1 has been entered.
3. Term 1 closes on 30 April and Term 2 opens on 30 April.
4. Academic Year 2026 contains a term numbered 4.
5. An invalid Term 2 reschedule is submitted after a valid Term 2 already exists.
Do not design classes yet. The goal is to determine what the software must observe, not how
the software will be organised.

End-of-step checkpoint

Established Chronology, permitted and unique term numbers, progressive configuration, year
containment, ordering, and unchanged state after rejection.
Explain Why does a same-day period clear chronology, while two terms sharing a boundary
day fail the ordering rule?
Next evidence Turn an agreed example into a failing test before choosing the implementation.

We now have something stronger than a list of requirements: concrete examples paired with explicit
rules. They are still written for humans, however. A future change to the program could violate one of
them without anybody noticing.
                                                                                                                                           11

NEXT QUESTION

How can we turn these agreed examples into executable evidence that guides the implementation
and keeps checking it as the code changes?
Next: Step 3 ­ From Examples to Tests: Introducing TDD
TRACK 01 / Start with the business, not the architecture
STEP 3

From Examples to Tests: Introducing
TDD

      What you will discover

     Turn an agreed business example into an executable test, explain the red­green­refactor
     rhythm, and distinguish a useful test failure from a failure that says nothing about the business
     behaviour.

Step 2 ended with something valuable: the school and the developer could now look at the same
proposal and explain why it should be accepted or rejected. For example, BR-2.1 says that a closing
date must be on or after its opening date.
That agreement is still written for humans. If somebody changes the program next month, the docu-
ment will not automatically tell us that the rule has been broken. The next move is therefore small but
important: take one of the examples we already trust and make the computer check it for us.

      Model evolution

      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Keep the agreed examples in prose.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING

     Make one example executable, let it guide a small change, then repeat.

   Choose one example, not the whole calendar

We could try to implement every rule from Step 2 immediately. That would hide the reason for each line
of code. Instead, we begin with the smallest behaviour we understand well: a period whose closing
date comes after its opening date should pass the chronology check.

For the tests in this book we will use pytest. Its plain functions and assertions let the examples remain
close to the language in which we first discussed them. The first test can be written before the production
function exists:

PYTHON

1 from datetime import date
2 from schoolgrid.calendar import is_chronological

3

4

5 def test_period_can_end_after_it_starts():

6       start = date(2026, 5, 1)

7       end = date(2026, 7, 28)

8

9       assert is_chronological(start, end)

                                  12
                                                                                                            13

The test says almost exactly what the business example said. It gives concrete input and states the
observable result we expect.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     What should a useful failure tell us?

      School administrator / Developer

 SA School administrator
If this test fails because you misspelled a file name, have we learned that the calendar
rule is wrong?

                      DEV Developer
                    No. We have only learned that the test cannot reach the behaviour yet.

 SA School administrator
Then what failure would actually teach us something about the rule?

                      DEV Developer
                    A failure that reaches the chronology check and shows that the current code accepts or
                    rejects the example incorrectly.

 SA School administrator
Good. So "red" is useful only when we understand why it is red.

If we run pytest -q now, however, the test cannot even import is_chronological. That is a failure,              TESTING

but it is not yet evidence about the chronology rule.                                                           Useful failure

So we add only enough production code for the test to reach its assertion:                                      A test should fail for the
                                                                                                                behaviour we are trying to
PYTHON                                                                                                          add. A broken import, syntax
                                                                                                                error, or test setup problem is
1 def is_chronological(start, end):                                                                             red, but it tells us nothing
                                                                                                                about whether the business
2       return True                                                                                             rule is implemented.

Now the first example passes. The implementation is almost embarrassingly small. That is accept-

able. We have only asked the software one question so far, and return True answers that question

correctly.

KEY IDEA In TDD, the implementation is allowed to be simpler than the final design. The next exam-
ple creates the pressure for the next change.

   The second example makes the first implementation inadequate

Step 2 also gave us the reversed case: 20 May­1 May must be rejected. We add it as a second test
rather than redesigning the function in anticipation.

PYTHON

1 def test_period_cannot_end_before_it_starts():

2       start = date(2026, 5, 20)

3       end = date(2026, 5, 1)
                               14                                                   Step 3. From Examples to Tests

                                   4

                                   5       assert not is_chronological(start, end)

TDD                            This time the test reaches the assertion and fails for the reason we care about: our current implemen-

Red                            tation returns True for a backwards period. This is the kind of failure TDD wants.
An executable example
demonstrates that the          The smallest general change that satisfies both examples is now visible:
desired behaviour is missing
or wrong. The failure should       PYTHON
be relevant to the behaviour
being developed.                   1 def is_chronological(start, end):

TDD                                2       return end >= start

Green                          Run the tests again. The normal period still passes, and the reversed period now passes because the
Make the current examples
pass with the simplest clear   function returns False for it. We have reached the green state.
implementation that satisfies
them. Green is not             Notice what did not happen. We did not begin by writing a large calendar engine. Two examples forced
permission to ignore design;   exactly one comparison into existence.
it gives us a safe point from
which to improve it.                  A boundary example checks the rule we think we wrote

                               There was one more chronology example in Step 2: equal opening and closing dates do not run back-
                               wards. We add that boundary case explicitly.

                                   PYTHON

                                   1 def test_same_day_period_is_chronological():

                                   2       day = date(2026, 5, 20)

                                   3

                                   4       assert is_chronological(day, day)

                               This test passes immediately because end >= start already includes equality.

                               That is not a TDD failure. A new example does not have to force new production code. Sometimes it
                               confirms that the rule we implemented already covers the boundary we intended. What matters is that
                               the behaviour is now executable and will be checked again whenever the suite runs.

                                   Example: The three examples now travel together

                                   Given the test suite contains a normal period, a reversed period, and a same-day period.
                                   When the chronology implementation changes.
                                   Then all three examples are checked again, so a change that fixes one case by breaking another
                                   is exposed.

                               This is why a solution such as "always reject the period" cannot satisfy the suite. It would make the
                               reversed example pass while breaking both accepted examples.

                                      Red, green, then improve without changing behaviour

                               We now have enough experience to name the development rhythm.

TDD

Refactor

Improve the structure,
names, or duplication of
working code while keeping
its externally observed
behaviour unchanged. The
tests should remain green
throughout.
                                                                                                        15

Move      What we do
Red       Add one executable example that exposes missing or incorrect behaviour.
Green     Make that example and all earlier examples pass with a small implementation change.
Refactor  Improve working code without changing the behaviour the tests observe.

There is no useful refactoring to perform on our one-line function yet. That is also a valid decision.
Refactor is an opportunity, not a ceremony. We should not make the design more elaborate merely
because the cycle contains a word called refactor.
The important part is the order:

1. choose the next behaviour we understand;
2. express it as an executable example;
3. see the relevant failure;
4. make the smallest clear change that satisfies it;
5. improve the design only when there is something worth improving.

       This is different from testing everything afterwards

Suppose we first build the entire calendar subsystem and only then write tests for all the rules from Step
2. Those tests may be useful, but they did not guide the design as it grew.
TDD uses tests earlier. The next example participates in deciding what code needs to exist. The
implementation and the examples grow together.

CONTRAST

Testing after implementation                        Test-driven development
Code is designed first; tests later check what was
built.                                              One desired behaviour is made executable be-
                                                    fore the implementation for that behaviour is com-
                                                    pleted.

TDD also does not mean writing every conceivable test for the whole system before writing any pro-
duction code. We are doing the opposite: one small example, one small implementation step, then the
next example.

       A red test can still be the wrong red

Imagine we accidentally type this import:

     PYTHON

     1 from schoolgrid.calender import is_chronological

The test run fails because calender is misspelled. The screen is red, but the failure tells us nothing

about whether a reversed period should be accepted.
Before changing production logic, ask a simple diagnostic question:
16                                    Step 3. From Examples to Tests

         Is the test failing because the expected business behaviour is absent, or because the test
         cannot reach that behaviour at all?

This distinction becomes increasingly important as systems gain databases, frameworks, networks,
and external services. A failing test is information; we still have to interpret what information it contains.

       Tests should describe behaviour, not our current implementation

Our tests call is_chronological and assert its result. They do not check which operator the function

uses internally, how many local variables it creates, or what line of code performs the comparison.
That is deliberate. A useful test gives us freedom to improve the implementation while preserving the
observable rule. If we later replace this crude function with a richer model, the business examples
should still make sense.

      Example: A safe internal change

     Given all chronology examples are green.
     When the internal implementation is reorganised without changing which periods are accepted
     or rejected.
     Then the tests should remain green because the observed behaviour has not changed.

This is the protection we wanted at the end of Step 2: the rules no longer depend only on somebody
remembering to reread the document after every code change.

       The remaining rules become a development queue

We have automated only BR-2.1. The other agreements from Step 2 are still waiting. We do not need
to implement them all in this step, but we can now see how they will enter development.

Business example                      Possible next executable behaviour

Term number 4 is proposed             Reject term numbers outside 1, 2, and 3.
A second Term 2 is added              Reject a duplicate term number.
Only Term 1 is scheduled              Allow a partially configured academic year.
Term 3 closes in January 2027         Reject a term outside the 2026 calendar-year policy.
Term 2 opens on Term 1's closing day  Reject terms that share a day.
An invalid reschedule is submitted    Preserve the previously accepted dates.

Each row can become a test when we are ready to implement that behaviour. The examples give us a
disciplined order of work rather than a reason to design the whole system in advance.

      Try it: Choose the next red test

     Assume the three chronology tests are green. Choose one rule from the table above and write,
     in plain language, the single example you would automate next. Then answer these questions:
     1. What observable result should the test assert?
     2. What would count as a meaningful failure?
     3. What kind of failure would merely indicate broken test setup?
     4. What is the smallest production behaviour that the example requires?
     Do not design the final class structure yet.
                                                                                                                                                 17

Our tests are already beginning to contain the vocabulary of the school: term, opening date, closing
date, academic year, reschedule. If those words mean one thing to the administrator and another to
the developer, executable tests will only make the misunderstanding faster.

        NEXT QUESTION

      Before the model grows, which words belong to this problem, who defines their meaning, and how
      do we make the same language appear in conversation, tests, and code?
      Next: Step 4 ­ Domain, Domain Experts, and Ubiquitous Language
TRACK 01 / Start with the business, not the architecture
STEP 4

Domain, Domain Experts, and
Ubiquitous Language

      What you will discover

     Explain what a domain and a domain expert are, build a shared language from a real misunder-
     standing, and make that language visible in conversation, tests, and small pieces of code.

Step 3 left us with executable examples. The tests can now tell us when a chronology rule is broken.
But the last lines of that step exposed a different risk: the software is beginning to contain words such
as term, opening date, academic year, and reschedule.
Tests cannot protect us from a word that the team understands in two different ways. They can faithfully
automate the wrong meaning.

       The first problem is not code

The developer is preparing the next test from the Step 2 rule that prohibits a second Term 2. Before
writing it, he describes what he plans to implement.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     What exactly are we changing?

      School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         Next I will test that the system cannot create two Semester 2 records for the same year.

     SA School administrator
    We do not call them semesters here. They are terms.

                          DEV Developer
                         Fine--two Term 2 records. If the dates change, I suppose I delete the old record and
                         create another Term 2?

     SA School administrator
    No. That sounds like a different term. The headteacher is changing the dates of the
    existing Term 2. We call that rescheduling it.

                          DEV Developer
                         So "schedule Term 2" and "reschedule Term 2" are different actions?

                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                 19

     SA School administrator
    Yes. Scheduling gives a term its period. Rescheduling changes the period of a term that
    is already scheduled.

Nothing has failed in Python. Yet the conversation has exposed three possible misunderstandings:
semester versus term, creating versus changing, and schedule versus reschedule.

      Model evolution
      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Assume ordinary words are close enough.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING

     Agree on the business meaning of important words, then use those meanings consistently.

The work itself gives the words their meaning

Why should the administrator's correction matter? Because SchoolGrid is being built for a particular                                                 DDD CONCEPT
area of work: planning and maintaining the school's academic calendar.
                                                                                                                                                     Domain
In Domain-Driven Design, that area of knowledge and activity is the domain.
                                                                                                                                                     The area of knowledge,
The domain is not the database, the Python package, or the user interface. Those are parts of a                                                      activity, rules, and problems
software solution. The domain exists even if the school is still using paper, spreadsheets, or meetings                                              that the software is intended
to manage it.                                                                                                                                        to support. Here, our current
                                                                                                                                                     focus is academic-calendar
Our school has many other areas of work: admissions, fees, examinations, attendance, staffing, and                                                   planning.
timetabling. We are not trying to model all of them now. The domain knowledge relevant to this part of
SchoolGrid is deliberately narrower: academic-calendar planning.

IN THIS SLICE                                      OUTSIDE FOR NOW

Academic years, terms, term numbers, periods,      Fees, attendance, student enrolment, lesson
scheduling, rescheduling, and the rules that make  timetables, examinations, staffing, and other
a calendar acceptable.                             school operations.

This boundary also affects language. A word may have a useful meaning in one area of work and a
different meaning elsewhere. We therefore ask, "What does this word mean for this problem?" rather
than trying to invent a universal definition for the whole school.

Who can correct the software team's assumptions?

The administrator did more than supply dates. She knew that 28 March still belongs to Term 1, that a                                                 DDD CONCEPT
year may be configured progressively, and that changing an existing term's dates is a reschedule rather
than a new term.                                                                                                                                     Domain expert

That kind of knowledge makes her a domain expert for the calendar work we are discussing.                                                            A person with authoritative or
                                                                                                                                                     practical knowledge of how
A domain expert does not have to be a programmer, a manager, or the person with the most senior                                                      the domain works, including
job title. Expertise is contextual. The bursar may be the better expert for school fees; an examinations                                             its terminology, decisions,
officer may be the better expert for assessment scheduling.                                                                                          exceptions, and business
                                                                                                                                                     rules.
Likewise, the developer contributes a different kind of expertise. He can expose ambiguity, construct
counterexamples, and show where a vague sentence would force the software to guess. Good mod-
20                                                      Step 4. Domain and Shared Language

elling comes from putting these forms of knowledge into the same conversation.

    CONTRAST

    Domain expertise                                Software expertise

    Knowledge of the school's calendar work: mean-  Knowledge of how to make those decisions ex-
    ings, rules, decisions, exceptions, and conse-  plicit, executable, testable, and maintainable in
    quences.                                        software.

Neither side can safely replace the other.

       Build the vocabulary from decisions we already made

Instead of starting with a dictionary, the developer returns to the concrete rules and asks what each
important word must mean for those rules to make sense.

       DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Agreeing on the calendar vocabulary

      School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                        When you say "Academic Year 2026," what are you referring to?

     SA School administrator
    The school year whose calendar we are configuring for 2026. It contains the terms we
    schedule for that year.

                          DEV Developer
                        And a term?

     SA School administrator
    One numbered teaching period in that academic year--Term 1, Term 2, or Term 3.

                          DEV Developer
                        You just used "period." Is that another word for term?

     SA School administrator
    No. The term is Term 2. Its period is the span from its opening date to its closing date. If
    we move those dates, it is still Term 2.

                          DEV Developer
                        Then the term number tells us which term it is and where it belongs in the sequence?

     SA School administrator
    Exactly.

That conversation gives us a first working vocabulary.
                                                                                  21

Business term  Meaning in this context
Academic Year
               The school year whose academic calendar is being configured,
Term           such as Academic Year 2026.
               A numbered teaching period within an academic year: Term 1, Term
Term number    2, or Term 3 in this scenario.
Period         The numbered position of a term in the academic year: 1, 2, or 3.
               The inclusive span from a term's opening date through its closing
Schedule       date.
Reschedule     Give a term a period when it is not yet scheduled.
Opening date   Change the period of a term that is already scheduled.
Closing date   The first day included in a period.
               The final day included in a period.

These are working definitions. If further conversations reveal that one of them is misleading, the team
should change the language and change the code that expresses it. Shared language is discovered
and refined; it is not frozen because somebody once typed a glossary.

       The distinction between a term and its period matters

The word choice now changes how we interpret an earlier request.

      Example: Reschedule Term 2

     Given Term 2 already exists with a period from 1 May to 28 July 2026.
     When the headteacher asks to reschedule Term 2 to open on 15 April.
     Then the request means changing the period of the existing Term 2, not creating another Term
     2.

If we treated term and period as synonyms, a date change could look like replacement of the whole
term. But the administrator has told us something more precise: the term remains Term 2 while its
dates may change.
We will not yet decide what kind of DDD object a Term should become. That is a modelling question for
later. At this point we only need to preserve the business meaning instead of losing it behind generic
words such as "record."

   Now the tests can speak more like the school

Our first TDD examples used short technical names:

PYTHON

1 def test_period_cannot_end_before_it_starts():

2       start = date(2026, 5, 20)

3       end = date(2026, 5, 1)

4

5       assert not is_chronological(start, end)

The behaviour is correct, but start and end throw away some of the vocabulary we have just agreed.

We can improve the test without changing its behaviour:
                             22                                                           Step 4. Domain and Shared Language

                             PYTHON

                                 1 def test_period_cannot_close_before_it_opens():

                                 2   opening_date = date(2026, 5, 20)

                                 3   closing_date = date(2026, 5, 1)

                                 4

                                 5   assert not is_chronological(opening_date, closing_date)

                             The production function can adopt the same parameter names:

                             PYTHON

                                 1 def is_chronological(opening_date, closing_date):

                                 2   return closing_date >= opening_date

                             No algorithm changed. This is a refactoring of language. The test and the code now preserve more of
                             what the school actually says.

                                 KEY IDEA Names in code are modelling decisions. When business language is precise, carrying
                                 that language into tests and code reduces translation and exposes misunderstandings earlier.

                                    Shared language is more than a glossary

DDD CONCEPT                  DDD calls this deliberately shared vocabulary a Ubiquitous Language.

Ubiquitous Language          "Ubiquitous" does not mean that every person in the world must use these words. It means the lan-
                             guage should be pervasive within the collaboration and model for this domain. If the administrator says
A shared, evolving language
developed by domain experts  reschedule, the requirement says reschedule, but the code says replace_calendar_row, the team
and software practitioners
and used consistently in     is continually translating between two languages.
conversations, rules,
examples, tests, and the     A glossary can help record meanings, but the language becomes valuable only when we actually use
model.                       it:

                             Where          Example of the shared language

                             Conversation   "Reschedule Term 2."
                             Business rule  "A term number occurs at most once within an academic year."
                             Example        "Term 2 opens on Term 1's closing day."
                             Test           test_period_cannot_close_before_it_opens
                             Code           opening_date, closing_date

                             The same ideas travel from the school conversation into executable software with less translation at
                             every boundary.

                                    Bad language often hides a missing decision

                             Suppose a developer says, "I will update the calendar record." That sentence is technically plausible but
                             weak as domain language. Which record? What business change is taking place? Are we scheduling
                             a new term, rescheduling an existing term, or changing the academic year itself?

                             Generic technical words are not forbidden. Databases really do have rows and records. But those
                             words should not replace meaningful domain language when we are describing domain behaviour.
                                                                                              23

CONTRAST                                   Domain description
                                           "Reschedule Term 2 with an earlier opening date."
Technical description
"Update the Term 2 record's start field."

The second description exposes more questions immediately: Does Term 2 already exist? Is the new
period acceptable? What happens if the reschedule is rejected? Those are exactly the decisions
SchoolGrid must protect.

       The language also tells us what not to assume

A shared term is useful only when its meaning is explicit. Consider schedule. The administrator defined
it as assigning a period to a term that is not yet scheduled. That means these two statements are not
interchangeable:

      Example: Schedule

     Given Term 2 has no period yet.
     When the administrator assigns it an opening and closing date.
     Then Term 2 is being scheduled.

      Example: Reschedule

     Given Term 2 already has an accepted period.
     When the administrator proposes different opening or closing dates.
     Then Term 2 is being rescheduled, and a rejected proposal must leave the accepted period
     unchanged.

The difference is not decorative vocabulary. The second operation has an existing accepted state to
preserve; the first does not.

       A language check before we add more code

We can now revisit the examples waiting in the TDD queue and phrase them using the shared vocabu-
lary:

Weak phrasing                              Domain phrasing
Add number 4
Duplicate row 2                            Schedule a term with term number 4.
Change start field                         Schedule a second Term 2 in the same academic year.
Dates cross years                          Reschedule Term 2 with a new opening date.
                                           Schedule a term whose period extends outside Aca-
Two records touch                          demic Year 2026.
                                           Schedule Term 2 to open on Term 1's closing date.

The right-hand column gives us better candidates for future test names because it states what happens
in the school's world rather than how we happen to store it.
24  Step 4. Domain and Shared Language

    Try it: Repair the language before repairing the code

    For each phrase below, identify what is ambiguous or overly technical, then rewrite it using the
    vocabulary established in this step:
    1. "Insert semester 2."
    2. "Change the start field on record 2."
    3. "Create another Term 2 with the corrected dates."
    4. "The two date records collide."
    For each rewrite, state one business question that becomes easier to ask once the language is
    more precise.

We now have rules, executable examples, and a vocabulary that connects the school conversation to
the code. But our implementation still passes loose pairs of dates around. Every caller must remember
what those dates mean and which rules belong with them.

        NEXT QUESTION

      If the language says that periods, terms, and academic years are meaningful concepts with different
      responsibilities, how should those concepts begin to appear in the software model?
       Next: Step 5 ­ From Business Rules to a Domain Model
TRACK 01 / Start with the business, not the architecture
STEP 5

From Business Rules to a Domain Model

What you will discover

Use business rules to discover candidate domain concepts and responsibilities, distinguish rules
that can be decided locally from rules that require wider context, and build a provisional School-
Grid model without prematurely naming DDD patterns.

Step 4 gave the team a much better language. We can now say that a Term has a period, that its term
number places it in the academic year, and that rescheduling changes the period of an existing term.

The code has not caught up with that understanding. Our chronology function still receives two loose
values:

PYTHON

1 def is_chronological(opening_date, closing_date):

2       return closing_date >= opening_date

That was enough for one rule. The next rules make the weakness harder to ignore.

    The same pair of dates starts travelling everywhere

To implement more of the Step 2 rules with only primitive values, we might begin adding functions like
these:

PYTHON

1 def is_chronological(opening_date, closing_date):

2       ...

3

4

5 def is_inside_year(year, opening_date, closing_date):

6       ...

7

8

9 def schedule_term(year, term_number, opening_date, closing_date):

10      ...

The opening and closing dates keep travelling together, but Python does not know that they belong
together. Every function must remember which argument is which and which relationships matter.

The problem becomes more obvious at a call site:

PYTHON

1 schedule_term(

2       2026,

3       2,

                  25
                               26                                           Step 5. From Rules to a Model

                                   4   date(2026, 4, 15),

                                   5   date(2026, 7, 28),

                                   6)

                               A reader has to reconstruct the meaning of four separate arguments. Worse, these values can be
                               rearranged accidentally without Python objecting.

                                   DOMAIN WORKSHOP

                                   Do these dates mean something together?

                                   School administrator / Developer

                                                         DEV Developer
                                                       I keep passing an opening date and a closing date together. From the school's point of
                                                       view, are they two unrelated facts?

                                    SA School administrator
                                   No. Together they describe the term's period.

                                                         DEV Developer
                                                       So when I check whether the closing date is before the opening date, I am really asking
                                                       whether that period makes sense?

                                    SA School administrator
                                   Yes. That decision belongs to the period itself. You should not need to rediscover it every
                                   place that uses the dates.

                               The conversation has created a modelling pressure: the software understands two separate dates,
                               while the school understands one meaningful span.

                                     Model evolution

                                     INITIAL INTERPRETATION

                                    Pass opening and closing dates as unrelated arguments.

                                     REVISED UNDERSTANDING

                                    Represent the date span once, then let the rules tell us what responsibility belongs with it.

DDD CONCEPT                           A domain model is a useful representation, not a class inventory

Domain model                   We now have enough pressure to introduce another DDD idea. A domain model is a purposeful repre-
                               sentation of the concepts, relationships, and behaviour needed to solve the domain problem.
A selective representation of  The word selective matters. SchoolGrid does not need a Python class for Headteacher merely be-
domain concepts and rules      cause a headteacher appeared in a conversation. Nor does it need a class called OpeningDate merely
used by the software to        because that phrase is important.
reason about the business      A better question is:
problem. It is not a copy of
every real-world noun or                Which concept has enough information to make this business decision, and where would
every database table.                   putting the rule make the model easier to understand and protect?
                                                                                                                                                 27
We can apply that question directly to the rules already discovered.

       The first responsibility needs only one span of dates

Consider BR-2.1: a closing date must be on or after its opening date.
To decide that rule, we need exactly two pieces of information:

        Information needed                     Information not needed

        Opening date                           Term number
        Closing date                           Other terms
                                               Academic year schedule

The rule can therefore be decided by the concept that represents the date span. The school calls that

span a period. In code, the team chooses the name DateRange for the object that represents the pair

of inclusive boundary dates. A Term's period will be represented by one of these date ranges.

That is a refinement of the shared language rather than a replacement for it: period remains the business

idea, while DateRange makes the structure of that period explicit in Python.

Our first sketch is deliberately small:

PYTHON

1 from dataclasses import dataclass
2 from datetime import date

3

4

5 @dataclass

6 class DateRange:

7       opening_date: date

8       closing_date: date

Now one value carries the two dates together:

PYTHON

1 term_2_period = DateRange(

2       opening_date=date(2026, 5, 1),

3       closing_date=date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

This alone does not enforce any rule. It simply gives the date pair a meaningful home.

   Put a rule where all of its information already lives

The next question is whether callers should still have to unpack the range and call a separate chronology
function.

They should not. The DateRange already contains everything required to answer the chronology ques-

tion, so the behaviour can move next to the data it uses:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass

2 class DateRange:

3       opening_date: date
28                                                         Step 5. From Rules to a Model

    4   closing_date: date

    5

    6   def is_chronological(self):

    7      return self.closing_date >= self.opening_date

The corresponding test becomes:

PYTHON

    1 def test_date_range_cannot_close_before_it_opens():

    2   period = DateRange(

    3      date(2026, 5, 20),

    4      date(2026, 5, 1),

    5   )

    6

    7   assert not period.is_chronological()

The algorithm has not become more sophisticated. The improvement is about responsibility: code
that has a DateRange can ask the DateRange about its own chronology instead of reconstructing the
rule elsewhere.

      Model decision: Chronology belongs with the date range

     The relationship between an opening date and a closing date can be decided using that date
     range alone. The model should therefore not require an AcademicYear, a Term, or an application
     service merely to answer whether the boundaries run forwards.

There is still an obvious weakness: we can construct a backwards DateRange and only discover the
problem when somebody remembers to call is_chronological(). We will return to that pressure

soon. For now, the important discovery is where the knowledge belongs.

       A term carries different information

The next rules cannot be answered by a DateRange alone. A date range such as 1 May­28 July does
not tell us whether it belongs to Term 1, Term 2, or Term 3.

The domain language from Step 4 tells us that a Term has a numbered position and may have a period.
Because the academic year may be configured progressively, a term may exist before its dates are
assigned.

A provisional representation could therefore look like this:

PYTHON

    1 @dataclass

    2 class Term:

    3   number: int

    4   period: DateRange | None = None

This code is intentionally incomplete. An ordinary int would allow 4, 99, or -1, even though BR-2.2

permits only 1, 2, and 3. We are not fixing every weakness as soon as we notice it. We are letting each
weakness create the next modelling question.

What has improved is the shape of the software:
                                                                                         29

PYTHON

1 term_2 = Term(

2       number=2,

3       period=DateRange(

4           date(2026, 5, 1),

5           date(2026, 7, 28),

6       ),

7)

The code now says something recognisable in the school's language: Term 2 has a period.

       Some rules require more than one term

Now consider BR-2.3. Can one Term decide whether it is a duplicate?
No. A Term can know that its number is 2, but it cannot know whether another Term 2 is already
scheduled unless it can see the other terms in the same academic year.
The same problem appears with BR-2.6. A DateRange can know its own boundaries. A Term can know
its own number and period. Neither can decide whether Term 1 finishes before Term 2 begins without
seeing both terms.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Who knows whether the calendar fits together?

      School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         Can Term 2 decide by itself whether it overlaps Term 1?

     SA School administrator
    Not without knowing Term 1's dates.

                          DEV Developer
                         And can Term 2 decide whether another Term 2 already exists?

     SA School administrator
    Again, it needs the rest of the year's schedule.

                          DEV Developer
                         Then those are not really questions about one term. They are questions about the
                         academic year containing the terms.

     SA School administrator
    That matches how we work. We judge whether the year's calendar fits together.

The conversation gives us a third candidate concept:
30                                                            Step 5. From Rules to a Model

PYTHON

    1 @dataclass

    2 class AcademicYear:

    3   year: int

    4   terms: list[Term]

Again, this is only a sketch. It does not yet protect the list from duplicates, overlaps, or arbitrary mu-
tation. Those are later design problems. The model is starting by making the relevant concepts and
relationships visible.

       Use the rules to assign provisional responsibilities

We can now revisit each business rule and ask what information is required to decide it.

Rule or question                     Information needed       Provisional home

Closing date is not before opening   One date range           DateRange
date
Is this Term 1, 2, or 3?             One term number          A more meaningful representation of the
                                                              term number is likely needed
What period is assigned to Term 2?   One term                 Term
Does another Term 2 already exist?   Several terms in one     AcademicYear
                                     year
Do two scheduled terms share a day?  Several term periods     AcademicYear
Does term chronology follow number-  Several terms and their  AcademicYear
ing?                                 numbers
Do scheduled dates belong to 2026?   Year plus term period    AcademicYear
May only Term 1 be scheduled for     The year's current       AcademicYear
now?                                 schedule

The right-hand column is provisional. We are not proving a final class design. We are using the infor-
mation required by each decision to avoid placing rules arbitrarily.

      KEY IDEA A useful modelling heuristic is to ask which concept has enough information to decide
      the rule. Local rules should not require the whole system; coordinating rules should not be pushed
      into an object that cannot see the necessary context.

       Local validity is not calendar validity

The distinction becomes concrete if we construct two individually sensible date ranges:

PYTHON

    1 term_1_period = DateRange(

    2   date(2026, 1, 1),

    3   date(2026, 3, 28),

    4)

    5

    6 term_2_period = DateRange(

    7   date(2026, 3, 28),

    8   date(2026, 7, 28),

    9)
                                                                                                                                                 31

Each range is chronological. Yet together they violate the calendar rule because both include 28 March.

      Example: Valid parts, invalid combination

     Given Term 1 has a chronological period ending on 28 March and Term 2 has a chronological
     period opening on 28 March.
     When the two terms are considered in the same academic year.
     Then each period passes its local chronology rule, but the academic-year schedule is rejected
     because the terms share a day.

This is a crucial modelling distinction. A concept can be locally valid without the larger combination
being valid.

If we put the overlap rule inside DateRange, we would have to give one range knowledge of other
ranges that do not belong to it. If we put chronology only in AcademicYear, we would force the whole

calendar to answer a question that one range can already answer by itself.
Good responsibility assignment keeps both mistakes out of the model.

   Do not turn every noun into a class

At this point it would be easy to become enthusiastic and create classes for OpeningDate,
ClosingDate, Headteacher, Administrator, ScheduleRequest, and every other noun we

have used.

That is not how a domain model is discovered.

A concept earns a place in the model because it carries meaning, behaviour, constraints, or relation-
ships that matter to the problem. Some nouns remain ordinary values. Some people remain actors
outside the model. Some concepts will become important only when later requirements create pres-
sure for them.

CONTRAST

Noun-driven modelling                            Responsibility-driven modelling
Find every noun in the requirements and make it  Use rules and decisions to discover which con-
a class.                                         cepts need to carry meaning or protect behaviour.

For SchoolGrid, DateRange, Term, and AcademicYear have appeared because the rules repeatedly

require those concepts to answer different kinds of questions.

   The first model is allowed to be imperfect

Our sketch currently looks like this:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass

2 class DateRange:

3       opening_date: date

4       closing_date: date

5

6       def is_chronological(self):

7         return self.closing_date >= self.opening_date
32                                                                         Step 5. From Rules to a Model

    8

    9

    10 @dataclass

    11 class Term:

    12  number: int

    13  period: DateRange | None = None

    14

    15

    16 @dataclass

    17 class AcademicYear:

    18  year: int

    19  terms: list[Term]

This is not the final SchoolGrid model. In fact, the examples already expose several weaknesses:

· a backwards DateRange can still be constructed;
· a Term can still receive number 4;
· callers could insert duplicate terms directly into the list;
· nothing yet protects term ordering or overlap;
· nothing yet ensures a rejected reschedule preserves the accepted state.

Those weaknesses are useful. They tell us where the next design pressure lives. We should resist the
temptation to solve all of them in one giant refactor.

TDD gives us a safer path: choose one behaviour, make the problem executable, and let the model
become stronger in response.

        A new question appears inside the smallest concept

The DateRange is the simplest part of the sketch, so we inspect it first.
Two administrators independently enter the same period:

PYTHON

    1 first = DateRange(

    2   date(2026, 5, 1),

    3   date(2026, 7, 28),

    4)

    5

    6 second = DateRange(

    7   date(2026, 5, 1),

    8   date(2026, 7, 28),

    9)

They are two Python objects created at different moments. But in the school's language, do they de-
scribe two different periods, or the same date span expressed twice?

That question is no longer about where to store a rule. It is about what kind of thing a DateRange is:
whether its meaning comes from a separate identity or from the values it contains.
                                                                                                                                           33

Try it: Find the smallest concept that can decide

For each question below, identify the minimum information required and the most reasonable
provisional home in the model. Explain why a smaller concept cannot decide it and why a larger
concept would be unnecessary.
1. Is 20 May­1 May a sensible date span?
2. Is term number 4 allowed?
3. Is there already a Term 2 in Academic Year 2026?
4. Do Term 1 and Term 2 share a calendar day?
5. If a proposed Term 2 reschedule is rejected, which accepted state must remain unchanged?
Do not name DDD tactical patterns yet. Focus on information and responsibility.

NEXT QUESTION

If two independently created DateRange objects contain the same opening and closing dates,
should the domain treat them as different things or as the same value?
Next: Step 6 ­ Value Objects: Modelling Meaningful Values
TRACK 02 / Build the smallest domain concepts
STEP 6

Value Objects: Modelling Meaningful
Values

What you will discover

Explain why two independently created date ranges can represent the same domain value,
distinguish value equality from object identity, and recognise why a DateRange does not need
a separate business identifier.

Step 5 ended with two administrators independently describing exactly the same period: 1 May through
28 July 2026. In Python, those descriptions can become two separate objects:

PYTHON

1 first = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 5, 1),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 second = DateRange(

7       date(2026, 5, 1),

8       date(2026, 7, 28),

9)

The objects were created separately. The business question is whether that fact matters.

       Ask the school before asking Python

The developer takes the question back to the administrator.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Are these two different periods?

      School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         Suppose you enter 1 May to 28 July and another administrator independently enters 1
                         May to 28 July. Do those describe two different periods?

     SA School administrator
    No. They describe the same span of dates.

                          DEV Developer
                         Even though the entries were made by different people at different times?

                            34
                                                                                                                                                 35

     SA School administrator
    That does not change the period. If the opening and closing dates are the same, the
    period is the same.

                          DEV Developer
                        Would you ever need to ask which one of those two periods is the original one?

     SA School administrator
    No. For a period, the dates are what matter.

That last answer changes how we should model the concept. The school does not care about the
history of the Python object. It cares about the values that describe the period.

      Model evolution
      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Treat every object instance as a different thing.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING

     Ask whether the domain distinguishes instances by identity or only by the values they contain.

   Python has two different questions

Python lets us make the distinction visible. With the provisional dataclass from Step 5, these two
expressions answer different questions:

PYTHON               # False
                     # True
  1 first is second
  2 first == second

is asks whether both variables refer to the same Python object. They do not. Two constructors ran,

so two objects exist in memory.

== asks whether the objects are equal according to their value. Python dataclasses generate equality

from their fields by default, so the two DateRanges compare equal because both boundary dates match.

The administrator's answer tells us that == is the comparison that matches the domain meaning.

      Example: Two constructions, one domain value

     Given two DateRange objects are constructed independently with opening date 1 May 2026
     and closing date 28 July 2026.
     When their meaning in the school calendar is compared.
     Then they represent the same period even though they are not the same Python object.

This gives us an executable example worth keeping:

PYTHON

1 def test_date_ranges_with_same_boundaries_are_equal():

2       first = DateRange(

3       date(2026, 5, 1),
                                36                                                           Step 6. Discovering Value Objects

                                    4         date(2026, 7, 28),

                                    5   )

                                    6   second = DateRange(

                                    7         date(2026, 5, 1),

                                    8         date(2026, 7, 28),

                                    9   )

                                    10

                                    11  assert first == second

                                The test may already pass because @dataclass gave us field-based equality in Step 5. That is useful

                                information rather than a problem. We have just discovered that an existing Python behaviour happens
                                to match a newly explicit business expectation.

                                TDD does not require us to damage the implementation just to manufacture a red test. The important
                                step is to record the example so future changes must preserve its meaning.

                                        Change one value and the meaning changes

                                The administrator's rule also tells us what should make two periods different. If one boundary changes,
                                the date span changes.

                                PYTHON

                                    1 def test_different_boundary_means_different_date_range():

                                    2   original = DateRange(

                                    3         date(2026, 5, 1),

                                    4         date(2026, 7, 28),

                                    5   )

                                    6   changed = DateRange(

                                    7         date(2026, 4, 15),

                                    8         date(2026, 7, 28),

                                    9   )

                                    10

                                    11  assert original != changed

                                The two ranges differ only in the opening date, but that is enough. The values that define the period
                                are no longer the same.

                                    CONTRAST

                                    Same value                                    Different value
                                    1 May­28 July compared with another indepen-  1 May­28 July compared with 15 April­28 July.
                                    dently constructed 1 May­28 July.

                                The distinction is about meaning, not allocation in memory.

                                       Now the DDD concept has earned a name

                                We have discovered a concept whose meaning is completely described by its attributes and for which
                                separate identity has no business significance. Domain-Driven Design calls this kind of concept a Value
                                Object.

DDD CONCEPT

Value Object

A domain concept whose
equality is based on the
values that describe it rather
than on a separate
continuing identity.
                                                                                                                                                 37

      DDD discovery: Value Object

     For SchoolGrid, a DateRange is a Value Object because its domain meaning is the combination
     of its opening and closing dates. Two DateRanges with equal boundaries represent the same
     value, regardless of when or where the Python objects were created.

A Value Object is not simply "an object that contains values." The important question is how the domain
distinguishes one instance from another.
If changing the descriptive values means we now have a different value, and the business has no
independent notion of "which exact one" must be tracked through time, value semantics are a strong
fit.

    Do we need an identifier anyway?

Developers are accustomed to adding IDs. It is tempting to give DateRange its own identifier immedi-
ately:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass

2 class DateRange:

3       range_id: str

4       opening_date: date

5       closing_date: date

Now imagine two administrators enter the same period but the system generates two identifiers:

PYTHON

1 first = DateRange(

2       "range-17",

3       date(2026, 5, 1),

4       date(2026, 7, 28),

5)

6

7 second = DateRange(

8       "range-42",

9       date(2026, 5, 1),

10      date(2026, 7, 28),

11 )

If the identifier participates in equality, these objects now compare as different even though the admin-
istrator just told us they describe the same period.

The right question is therefore not "Can we add an ID?" We obviously can. The question is:

    What business question would this identifier answer that the opening and closing dates
    cannot answer?

For DateRange, we currently have no such question.

      Model decision: DateRange has value equality, not business identity

     SchoolGrid compares DateRanges using their boundary dates. We do not introduce a separate
     domain identifier merely because a DateRange is represented by an object or might eventually
38                                                    Step 6. Discovering Value Objects

     be stored somewhere.

A database may later use a technical key for storage mechanics. That does not mean the key must
become part of the domain concept or define its equality. We will keep persistence concerns separate
from business meaning.

       The term exposes a different kind of question

The distinction becomes clearer if we compare DateRange with the Term that uses it.
In Step 4, the administrator said that rescheduling Term 2 changes its period but it is still Term 2.
Suppose the original period is:

PYTHON

    1 original_period = DateRange(

    2   date(2026, 5, 1),

    3   date(2026, 7, 28),

    4)

and the accepted reschedule uses:

PYTHON

    1 new_period = DateRange(

    2   date(2026, 4, 15),

    3   date(2026, 7, 28),

    4)

Those are two different DateRange values. The opening date changed, so the value changed.

But the school still speaks about Term 2 before the reschedule and Term 2 after the reschedule. Some-
thing about Term 2 continues even while one of its descriptive values changes.

We will not name that second DDD pattern yet. For now, it is enough to notice that not every domain
concept should use the same equality rule.

    Example: A new period does not imply a new term

    Given Term 2 originally has period 1 May­28 July 2026.
    When the school accepts a reschedule to 15 April­28 July 2026.
    Then the DateRange value is different, while the business still refers to the continuing Term 2.

This is why "make every domain class a Value Object" would be just as misguided as "give every domain
class an ID." The domain decides which distinction matters.

       Value equality makes tests read naturally

Once equality reflects domain meaning, tests can compare expected and actual values directly.
Imagine some code calculates the period that should be proposed for Term 2:
                                                                                39

PYTHON

1 expected = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 4, 15),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 actual = proposed_period_for_term_2()

7

8 assert actual == expected

The assertion says what the test means: the returned period should have the same value as the ex-
pected period. It does not need to inspect object addresses or invent identifiers simply to compare two
date spans.

This property becomes especially useful as models grow. Small meaningful values can travel through
the model while retaining their own equality semantics.

   But our DateRange is still too easy to damage

We have improved the meaning of equality, but inspect the current class again:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass

2 class DateRange:

3       opening_date: date

4       closing_date: date

5

6       def is_chronological(self):

7       return self.closing_date >= self.opening_date

Two weaknesses from Step 5 remain.
First, a backwards range can still be created:

PYTHON

1 broken = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 5, 20),

3       date(2026, 5, 1),

4)

The object exists even though it represents a date span that violates BR-2.1. We only discover the

problem if somebody remembers to call is_chronological().

Second, its boundaries can currently be reassigned after construction:

PYTHON

1 period = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 5, 1),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 period.closing_date = date(2026, 4, 1)

The same Python object has now changed from one value into another--and possibly into an invalid
one. That sits awkwardly with the idea we just discovered: a DateRange is meaningful because of the
40                                                     Step 6. Discovering Value Objects

values that describe it.
These are not equality problems. They are questions about how a Value Object should protect its own
meaning throughout its life.

      KEY IDEA Value Object is primarily a statement about domain meaning and equality. Once that
      meaning is clear, it creates further design questions about invariants, behaviour, and mutation.

       A precise mental model before moving on

For the DateRange we have learned four things so far:

Question                       SchoolGrid answer

What describes it?             Opening date and closing date.
When are two equal?            When both boundary dates are equal.
Does separate object identity  No. Independently created equal ranges represent the same domain value.
matter?
Does it need a business ID?    No business requirement discovered so far requires one.

Notice what is not in the table yet: how creation should reject invalid boundaries, whether the value
should be immutable, how many days it contains, whether a date lies inside it, or whether two ranges
overlap. Those are behaviour and invariant questions created by the same concept, and they deserve
their own step.

      Try it: Identity or value?

     For each description below, decide what evidence you would need before modelling it by value.
     Do not classify by noun alone.
     1. Two independently created DateRanges both represent 1 May­28 July 2026.
     2. Term 2 changes its period after a reschedule.
     3. Two strings both contain the text "Term 2."
     4. Two proposed periods have the same dates but were submitted by different administrators.
     For each case, ask: if all descriptive values are equal, does the business still need to distinguish
     which one it is? Explain your answer using the domain, not Python object addresses or database
     keys.

    NEXT QUESTION

    If a DateRange is defined by its values, should those values be allowed to mutate or become invalid
    after construction--and what useful behaviour should the range itself provide?

    Next: Step 7 ­ Value Object Behaviour and Invariants
TRACK 02 / Build the smallest domain concepts
STEP 7

Value Object Behaviour and Invariants

What you will discover

Protect a Value Object's validity throughout its life, explain why immutability fits value seman-
tics, and derive inclusive duration, membership, and overlap behaviour from concrete calendar
questions.

Step 6 established what a DateRange is: its meaning comes from its opening and closing dates, and
two ranges with equal boundaries represent the same domain value.

But the class still permits two uncomfortable things. We can create a backwards range, and we can
mutate a valid range into a different--possibly invalid--one:

PYTHON

1 period = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 5, 1),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 period.closing_date = date(2026, 4, 1)

The equality semantics are right, but the object does not yet protect the meaning we gave it.

   A backwards DateRange should never become an accepted value

Our current design contains this method:

PYTHON

1 def is_chronological(self):

2       return self.closing_date >= self.opening_date

That method can detect a problem, but only after the problematic object already exists. Every caller
must remember to ask the question.

The developer takes that weakness back to the school conversation.

DOMAIN WORKSHOP

Should an invalid period exist first and be checked later?

School administrator / Developer

        DEV Developer
        Right now I can create a period from 20 May to 1 May and then ask whether it is
        chronological.

                                          41
                               42                                                        Step 7. Value Object Behaviour

                                    SA School administrator
                                   Why would that ever count as a period we can use? It closes before it opens.

                                           DEV Developer
                                           So rather than creating it and hoping every caller checks it, construction itself should fail?

                                    SA School administrator
                                   Yes. If those boundaries do not describe a valid period, do not let that period into the
                                   calendar work.

                               This gives us a stronger expectation than the predicate from Step 3. We can make that expectation
                               executable:

                                   PYTHON

                                   1 def test_date_range_rejects_reversed_boundaries():

                                   2       with pytest.raises(ValueError):

                                   3       DateRange(

                                   4          date(2026, 5, 20),

                                   5          date(2026, 5, 1),

                                   6       )

                               With the Step 6 implementation, this test fails: construction succeeds. That is our next useful red test.

                               The rule can move into construction:

                                   PYTHON

                                   1 @dataclass
                                   2 class DateRange:

                                   3       opening_date: date

                                   4       closing_date: date

                                   5

                                   6       def __post_init__(self):

                                   7       if self.closing_date < self.opening_date:

                                   8          raise ValueError(

                                   9                   "closing date cannot be before opening date"

                                   10         )

MODELLING                      Now every DateRange created through its supported constructor satisfies the chronology rule.
                               That condition is an invariant.
Invariant
                                     Model decision: Chronology becomes a DateRange invariant
A condition that must remain
true for every valid instance       A DateRange is accepted only when its closing date is on or after its opening date. Callers no
or accepted state of a model        longer receive a DateRange and then decide whether its own boundaries are chronological.
concept. For DateRange, the
closing date must never        The old is_chronological() method has now lost its purpose. If a DateRange exists, chronology
precede the opening date.
                               is already guaranteed. Removing the method makes the model's promise clearer.

                                   Model evolution

                                   INITIAL INTERPRETATION

                                   Create any pair of dates, then remember to ask whether the range is valid.
                                                                                                                                           43

REVISED UNDERSTANDING

Allow DateRange construction only when its own invariant is satisfied.

    The invariant must survive after construction

Construction is only half the problem. With an ordinary dataclass, this is still possible:

PYTHON

1 period = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 5, 1),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 period.closing_date = date(2026, 4, 1)

The constructor checked a valid value, but mutation later destroyed the invariant.                                                             MODELLING
For this Value Object, the simplest design is to make the value immutable: once a DateRange has
been created, its boundaries do not change.                                                                                                    Immutability
Python's frozen dataclass gives us that behaviour:
                                                                                                                                               An immutable object does
PYTHON                                                                                                                                         not change its observable
                                                                                                                                               state after creation. A
1 @dataclass(frozen=True)                                                                                                                      different value is represented
                                                                                                                                               by creating a different object.
2 class DateRange:

3       opening_date: date

4       closing_date: date

5

6       def __post_init__(self):

7       if self.closing_date < self.opening_date:

8       raise ValueError(

9                   "closing date cannot be before opening date"

10      )

The choice fits the meaning discovered in Step 6. A DateRange is the value of its two boundaries. If a
boundary changes, we have a different DateRange value, not the same value with a hidden history of
mutations.

This does not mean that every Value Object in every language must be implemented with exactly this
mechanism. It is a deliberate SchoolGrid design: immutability makes the DateRange's value semantics
and invariant easier to protect.

    Rescheduling replaces the value rather than editing it

Immutability does not prevent the school from changing a term's schedule. It changes how that modifi-
cation is represented.

The original Term 2 period is:

PYTHON

1 original_period = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 5, 1),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),
44                                     Step 7. Value Object Behaviour

    4)

If the school accepts the earlier opening date from Step 1, we construct a new value:

    PYTHON

    1 rescheduled_period = DateRange(

    2       date(2026, 4, 15),

    3       date(2026, 7, 28),

    4)

The original remains 1 May­28 July. The new value represents 15 April­28 July. A longer-lived concept
such as Term 2 can later replace which DateRange it refers to without requiring the DateRange itself to
mutate.

      Example: A changed schedule uses a replacement value

     Given the accepted Term 2 period is 1 May­28 July 2026.
     When a reschedule to 15 April­28 July is accepted.
     Then a new DateRange represents the new period while the original DateRange remains un-
     changed.

We have not yet named the DDD pattern that describes the continuing Term 2. That question is still
waiting for a later step. For now, the important point is that changing which value is used is different
from mutating the value itself.

       The administrator asks about a boundary day

Once a DateRange can be trusted to exist in a valid state, the next questions are not about validity.
They are about useful behaviour.
The school has repeatedly treated opening and closing dates as inclusive. The administrator now asks
a direct question about Term 2.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Does the closing day belong to the period?

      School administrator / Developer

     SA School administrator
    Term 2 runs from 1 May through 28 July. If I ask whether 28 July belongs to Term 2, what
    does SchoolGrid answer?

                          DEV Developer
                         Yes. We agreed that both boundaries are inclusive.

     SA School administrator
    And 1 May?

                          DEV Developer
                         Also yes. A day before 1 May or after 28 July is outside the period.
                                                                                           45

The examples become tests:

PYTHON

1 def test_date_range_includes_both_boundaries():

2       period = DateRange(

3          date(2026, 5, 1),

4          date(2026, 7, 28),

5       )

6

7       assert period.includes(date(2026, 5, 1))

8       assert period.includes(date(2026, 7, 28))

The DateRange already has everything needed to answer the question:

PYTHON

1 def includes(self, day):

2       return self.opening_date <= day <= self.closing_date

The method reads almost like the business statement. The first and last days are inside because both
comparisons are inclusive.

Example: A day just outside the period

Given a DateRange covers 1 May through 28 July 2026.
When we ask whether 29 July belongs to it.

Then includes returns false because 29 July lies beyond the inclusive closing boundary.

   Inclusive boundaries also change how we count days

The administrator's next question looks trivial until we test the smallest boundary case.
How many days are in a DateRange whose opening and closing dates are both 20 May?
The answer is one, not zero. The single boundary day belongs to the range.

PYTHON

1 def test_same_day_range_has_duration_of_one_day():

2       period = DateRange(

3          date(2026, 5, 20),

4          date(2026, 5, 20),

5       )

6

7       assert period.days == 1

Python's subtraction counts the distance between the dates, so equal dates have a difference of zero.
Our domain uses inclusive boundaries, therefore the domain calculation adds one:

PYTHON

1 @property

2 def days(self):

3       return (

4          self.closing_date - self.opening_date

5       ).days + 1

For 1 May through 2 May, the difference is one day but the inclusive period contains two calendar days.
46                                                          Step 7. Value Object Behaviour

The same formula gives two.

The important lesson is not the arithmetic. It is that a tiny implementation detail came from an explicit
domain decision about what the boundaries mean.

        Then two periods meet at the same day

Step 2 established that two terms may not share a day. Before the AcademicYear can enforce that policy,
we need a reliable way to answer a smaller factual question: do these two DateRanges overlap?

Consider these ranges:

    PYTHON

    1 term_1_period = DateRange(

    2       date(2026, 1, 1),

    3       date(2026, 3, 28),

    4)

    5

    6 proposed_term_2_period = DateRange(

    7       date(2026, 3, 28),

    8       date(2026, 7, 28),

    9)

They share 28 March. Because both DateRanges include their boundaries, they overlap.
A test captures that boundary case:

    PYTHON

    1 def test_ranges_overlap_when_they_share_a_boundary_day():

    2       first = DateRange(

    3          date(2026, 1, 1),

    4          date(2026, 3, 28),

    5       )

    6       second = DateRange(

    7          date(2026, 3, 28),

    8          date(2026, 7, 28),

    9       )

    10

    11      assert first.overlaps(second)

    12      assert second.overlaps(first)

The second assertion matters. Overlap is symmetric: if the first overlaps the second, the second over-
laps the first.

The implementation can express the inclusive relationship directly:

    PYTHON

    1 def overlaps(self, other):

    2       return (

    3          self.opening_date <= other.closing_date

    4          and other.opening_date <= self.closing_date

    5       )

Now compare a period beginning the next day:
                                                                                                   47

PYTHON

1 term_2_period = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 3, 29),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 assert not term_1_period.overlaps(term_2_period)

This mirrors the boundary conversation from Step 1: 28 March conflicts; 29 March clears that particular
relationship.

       A DateRange can answer a fact without owning the policy

There is an important boundary in the model here.

DateRange.overlaps(other) answers a factual question about two date spans. It does not decide

whether the school permits two Terms to use those spans.
The prohibition against overlapping Terms belongs to the academic calendar rule from BR-2.6. That
decision needs term numbers, the terms being scheduled, and the wider AcademicYear context.

CONTRAST

DateRange responsibility                        AcademicYear responsibility
Answer: "Do these two inclusive spans share at  Decide: "May these two numbered terms coexist
least one day?"                                 in this year's accepted schedule?"

This distinction prevents a useful Value Object from becoming a miniature calendar engine. It should
provide the behaviour naturally associated with its value, while wider business policy remains with the
concept that has the required context.

KEY IDEA A Value Object should protect its own invariants and provide behaviour that belongs nat-
urally to its value. It should not absorb business decisions that require information it does not
own.

    The DateRange has now become a trustworthy building block

Putting the discoveries together gives us a compact implementation:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass(frozen=True)

2 class DateRange:

3       opening_date: date

4       closing_date: date

5

6       def __post_init__(self):

7         if self.closing_date < self.opening_date:

8         raise ValueError(

9                   "closing date cannot be before opening date"

10        )

11

12      @property

13      def days(self):
48                                                                     Step 7. Value Object Behaviour

    14      return (

    15                  self.closing_date - self.opening_date

    16      ).days + 1

    17

    18      def includes(self, day):

    19      return self.opening_date <= day <= self.closing_date

    20

    21      def overlaps(self, other):

    22      return (

    23                  self.opening_date <= other.closing_date

    24                  and other.opening_date <= self.closing_date

    25      )

Every part of this class now has a reason in the story:

Design choice            Domain reason

Value equality           Equal boundaries describe the same period.
Construction invariant   A period cannot close before it opens.
frozen=True              Changing a boundary means a different DateRange value.
days                     Duration uses inclusive boundaries; a same-day range has one day.
includes                 Opening and closing days both belong to the period.
overlaps                 Sharing even one inclusive boundary day means the spans overlap.

The class is no longer just a convenient container for two dates. It carries a small, coherent piece of
the domain model.

        One primitive is still leaking an invalid domain value

The next weak point is visible in the provisional Term from Step 5:

    PYTHON

    1 @dataclass

    2 class Term:

    3       number: int

    4       period: DateRange | None = None

The type annotation says int, so Python is perfectly happy with this:

     PYTHON

     1 broken = Term(number=4)

But BR-2.2 says the SchoolGrid teaching model recognises only Term 1, Term 2, and Term 3.

We have just used a Value Object to stop invalid date spans from leaking through the model. The
term number now presents the same kind of pressure in a smaller form: an unrestricted programming-
language value represents states the domain does not permit.
                                                                                                                                           49

Try it: Predict the DateRange behaviour

Without running the code, determine the result of each case and justify it using inclusive bound-
aries and the DateRange invariant:
1. 20 May­20 May: how many days?
2. Does 1 May­28 July include 1 May? Does it include 28 July?
3. Do 1 January­28 March and 28 March­20 May overlap?
4. Do 1 January­28 March and 29 March­20 May overlap?
5. What happens when construction is attempted with 20 May­1 May?
6. If the school reschedules a term, why should it create another DateRange rather than modify

    the accepted one?
For the overlap cases, separate the factual DateRange answer from the school's later decision
about whether two Terms may use those ranges.

NEXT QUESTION

If SchoolGrid permits only term numbers 1, 2, and 3, why should an unrestricted integer such as 4
be allowed to enter the domain model at all?

Next: Step 8 ­ Another Value Object: Making Invalid Values Impossible
                             TRACK 02 / Build the smallest domain concepts
                             STEP 8

                             Another Value Object: Making Invalid
                             Values Impossible

                             What you will discover

                             Recognise when an unrestricted programming-language value represents impossible domain
                             states, model the permitted term numbers as a constrained Value Object, and distinguish a valid
                             term number from the separate rule that prevents duplicate terms in one academic year.

                             Step 7 ended with a class that Python considers perfectly reasonable:

                             PYTHON

                             1 @dataclass

                             2 class Term:

                             3       number: int

                             4       period: DateRange | None = None

PYTHON                       The annotation says that a term number is an integer. That is true, but it is not the whole business
                             meaning.
Type annotation
                             Python is therefore equally happy with all of these:
A type annotation documents
the kind of value expected        PYTHON
and helps static-analysis
tools, but ordinary Python        1 Term(number=1)
does not automatically            2 Term(number=2)
enforce all business              3 Term(number=4)
restrictions at runtime.          4 Term(number=-10)

                             The first two make sense in SchoolGrid. The others do not. Our model still allows values that the school
                             does not recognise.

                                    An ordinary integer knows arithmetic, not the school rule

                             The developer returns to BR-2.2, which says that this teaching model permits only Term 1, Term 2, and
                             Term 3.

                                     DOMAIN WORKSHOP

                                  Is 4 ever a term number here?

                                   School administrator / Developer

                                                       DEV Developer
                                                      Python lets me construct a Term with number 4. Should that object ever enter the
                                                      calendar model?

                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                 51

     SA School administrator
    No. We have Term 1, Term 2, and Term 3. There is no Term 4 in this academic calendar.

                          DEV Developer
                        What about 0 or a negative number?

     SA School administrator
    Those are not term numbers either.

                          DEV Developer
                         So the valid values are not "any integer." They are exactly 1, 2, and 3?

     SA School administrator
    Exactly.

The programming language gives us a much larger set of values than the domain allows.

      Model evolution
      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Represent a term number as any integer and validate it later.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING

     Represent only the three values the SchoolGrid domain recognises.

   A type annotation cannot enforce the business set

Changing the annotation does not solve the problem unless the new type actually protects its meaning.

This declaration:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass

2 class Term:

3       number: int

helps readers and static-analysis tools understand that number should be an integer. At runtime, how-
ever, int contains many values outside the business set {1, 2, 3}.

The business requirement is therefore stronger than "this value has integer syntax." It is:

   A term number is one of the three permitted positions in this academic year: 1, 2, or 3.

That is a small domain concept with its own invariant.                                                                                               MODELLING

       Make the invalid example executable first                                                                                                     Constrained value

We already know the boundary we want to protect. A useful next test says that 4 must not become a                                                    A value whose business
TermNumber:                                                                                                                                          meaning permits only a
                                                                                                                                                     subset of the values its
                                                                                                                                                     programming-language type
                                                                                                                                                     could otherwise represent.
52                                                            Step 8. Valid Term Numbers

PYTHON

    1 def test_term_number_rejects_four():

    2   with pytest.raises(ValueError):

    3   TermNumber(4)

We should also protect the lower side of the set:

PYTHON

    1 def test_term_number_rejects_zero():

    2   with pytest.raises(ValueError):

    3   TermNumber(0)

The first implementation can begin as the smallest real type that lets the test reach the behaviour we
care about:

PYTHON

    1 @dataclass(frozen=True, order=True)

    2 class TermNumber:

    3   value: int

Now TermNumber(4) can be constructed, so the rejection test fails for the right reason: the business

restriction is missing.

We add that restriction at construction:

PYTHON

    1 def __post_init__(self):

    2   if self.value not in (1, 2, 3):

    3   raise ValueError(

    4      "term number must be 1, 2, or 3"

    5   )

Construction is now the boundary at which the domain restriction is enforced. If a TermNumber exists,

its value is one the school permits.

    Model decision: TermNumber represents the constrained domain value

    SchoolGrid does not pass arbitrary integers around as term numbers. A supported TermNumber
    can contain only 1, 2, or 3, so code receiving one does not need to repeat that validation.

       The three accepted values deserve tests too

Rejecting bad input is only half the behaviour. A broken implementation that rejects every integer would
satisfy both tests above.

We therefore record the three accepted positions:

PYTHON

    1 @pytest.mark.parametrize("value", [1, 2, 3])

    2 def test_term_number_accepts_permitted_values(value):

    3   number = TermNumber(value)

    4

    5   assert number.value == value

Now the executable examples describe both sides of the rule:
                                                      53

Input          Expected domain result

1              Construct TermNumber 1
2              Construct TermNumber 2
3              Construct TermNumber 3
0              Reject
4              Reject
-1             Reject

The class is small because the business concept is small. That is not a weakness. The purpose is
not to justify a class with lots of methods. The purpose is to make an invalid domain value difficult to
represent accidentally.

      KEY IDEA A useful Value Object can be tiny. Its value comes from protecting domain meaning, not
      from having many fields or methods.

       Term can now require the meaningful value

The provisional Term now communicates that its supported number is a TermNumber, not an arbitrary

integer:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass

2 class Term:

3       number: TermNumber

4       period: DateRange | None = None

Construction now reads differently:

    PYTHON

     1 term_2 = Term(number=TermNumber(2))

There is a little more syntax than Term(number=2), but the model carries more information. Any code       PYTHON
that already has a TermNumber knows that the value is one of the permitted positions.
                                                                                                          Annotation vs runtime rule
This does not mean a Python annotation magically prevents a caller from writing Term(number=4).
                                                                                                          The annotation
The domain's supported construction path should supply a TermNumber; later layers can enforce that        communicates intent. The
boundary when raw input enters the system.                                                                TermNumber constructor
                                                                                                          enforces the business
Compare that with the old approach:                                                                       restriction. They solve
                                                                                                          different problems.
PYTHON

1 def schedule_term(number: int):

2       if number not in (1, 2, 3):

3            raise ValueError("invalid term number")

4       ...

If every operation accepts an unrestricted integer, every operation becomes a possible place to forget
the rule. The constrained value moves the invariant to one supported construction boundary.
54  Step 8. Valid Term Numbers

       This is another Value Object, but for a different reason

DateRange and TermNumber look different in size, but they share the important Value Object charac-
teristics we discovered earlier.

Two independently constructed TermNumber(2) values mean the same thing:

     PYTHON

     1 first = TermNumber(2)
     2 second = TermNumber(2)

         3

     4 assert first == second

We do not need an identifier to distinguish "this 2" from "that 2." Their meaning comes from the value
they contain.
The object is also immutable. Turning TermNumber 2 into TermNumber 3 would not be "editing the
same value"; it would mean using a different numbered position.

      DDD discovery: Another Value Object

     TermNumber is a Value Object because its meaning is determined by its permitted value. Equal-
     ity is by value, it has no separate business identity, and its construction protects the invariant
     that only 1, 2, and 3 are valid.

This reinforces an important point: Value Objects do not have to be composite structures such as Dat-
eRange. A single constrained value can deserve a domain type when the restriction carries important
meaning.

       But do not wrap every primitive automatically

It would be easy to turn this lesson into a mechanical rule: every integer, string, and date should receive
its own class.
That would miss the reason TermNumber appeared.
We introduced it because all of these were true:

· the business has a precise restricted set of valid values;

· an ordinary int allows many invalid states;

· the restriction appears wherever a term number enters the domain;
· the value has a clear name in the ubiquitous language;
· construction can protect the rule once for all callers.

A primitive that carries no additional domain meaning may remain a primitive. The model should become
more expressive where the business demands it, not more ceremonial everywhere.
                                                                                                       55

CONTRAST

Mechanical wrapping                                 Domain-driven value
Create a class merely because a field uses an int,
string, or date.                                    Create a meaningful type when the domain gives
                                                    the value constraints or behaviour worth protect-
                                                    ing.

       Ordering comes from the meaning of the number

The three term numbers also describe positions in a sequence. In the implementation above,

order=True lets that relationship be expressed naturally:

     PYTHON

     1 assert TermNumber(1) < TermNumber(2)
     2 assert TermNumber(2) < TermNumber(3)

That ordering will later help us state rules such as "an earlier-numbered term must finish before a later-
numbered term begins."
The comparison does not decide whether two Terms overlap or whether a schedule is acceptable. It
only captures a fact about the ordered values 1, 2, and 3. Wider calendar policy still belongs with the
concept that can see the calendar.

       A valid TermNumber does not mean the term may be added

Now we reach an important boundary. This is valid:

     PYTHON

     1 number = TermNumber(2)

And this is also valid:

     PYTHON

     1 another_number = TermNumber(2)

The two values are equal. Nothing is wrong with constructing TermNumber 2 twice.
But BR-2.3 says one AcademicYear may not contain two scheduled Terms with number 2.
Those are different rules.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     If 2 is valid twice, why is a second Term 2 wrong?

      School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer

                      I can construct TermNumber(2) twice and both values are valid. Does that mean the
                         year may contain two Term 2s?
                               56                                                                               Step 8. Valid Term Numbers

                                    SA School administrator
                                   No. The number 2 is a valid value every time you write it. The problem is having two
                                   different Terms claiming the Term 2 position in the same academic year.

                                           DEV Developer
                                           So one rule validates the value itself, while another rule validates how Terms are
                                           combined?

                                    SA School administrator
                                   Exactly. Do not make the number responsible for knowing the whole calendar.

                                   Example: Valid value, invalid calendar combination

                                   Given Academic Year 2026 already contains a Term whose number is TermNumber 2.
                                   When someone attempts to add another Term whose number is also TermNumber 2.
                                   Then TermNumber 2 itself is still a valid value, but the AcademicYear must reject the duplicate
                                   Term.

                               If TermNumber tried to prevent a second TermNumber(2) from ever existing, it would need global

                               knowledge of every object already created. That is not the meaning of the value and would make the
                               model much worse.

                                   CONTRAST                       AcademicYear invariant
                                                                  Within one academic year, the same term number
                                   TermNumber invariant           must not identify two Terms.
                                   The value must be 1, 2, or 3.

                               The first rule is local to one value. The second requires the collection of Terms inside an AcademicYear.

MODELLING                             The term number identifies something without being that thing

Local vs contextual            A subtle question now appears. If the school says "Term 2," the number 2 helps us identify which term
invariant
                               is being discussed. Does that make TermNumber itself an entity?
A local invariant can be
decided from one object or     No. The value 2 has no independent history. Two TermNumber(2) objects are interchangeable. We
value. A contextual invariant
needs information from the     do not care which instance was created first.
surrounding model.
                               The Term, however, is beginning to behave differently.

                               Recall the reschedule from earlier steps:

                               PYTHON

                                   1 term_2 = Term(

                                   2   number=TermNumber(2),

                                   3   period=DateRange(

                                   4       date(2026, 5, 1),

                                   5       date(2026, 7, 28),

                                   6   ),

                                   7)

                               Later, the school accepts a new period beginning on 15 April. The DateRange value changes. The
                               TermNumber remains 2. More importantly, the administrator still speaks about the continuing Term 2
                                                                                                                                                 57

rather than a newly created term.
That continuity is not a property of the integer-like value 2. It belongs to the Term that 2 identifies within
its academic year.

      Example: The identifying value stays while other state changes

     Given Term 2 of Academic Year 2026 has an accepted period of 1 May­28 July.
     When the school reschedules it to 15 April­28 July.
     Then its DateRange is a different value, its TermNumber remains 2, and the school still treats it
     as the same Term 2.

We have now reached a question that Value Object semantics cannot answer on their own: how should
the model represent a domain concept that remains the same thing while some of its attributes change?

      Try it: Separate value validity from calendar validity

     For each statement, decide whether it is a rule about one TermNumber or a rule requiring wider
     AcademicYear context. Explain why.
     1. TermNumber 4 is proposed.
     2. TermNumber 2 is constructed twice in two different tests.
     3. Academic Year 2026 already contains Term 2 and another Term 2 is proposed.
     4. TermNumber 1 is compared with TermNumber 3 to determine their order.
     5. Term 2 changes from one valid DateRange to another valid DateRange.
     Then answer: if the value 2 is interchangeable wherever it appears, what exactly is it that con-
     tinues through a reschedule?

        NEXT QUESTION

      Term 2 can receive a different DateRange and still remain the same Term 2. What kind of domain
      object is defined by that continuing identity rather than by equality of all its current attributes?
       Next: Step 9 ­ Entities: When Identity Matters
TRACK 02 / Build the smallest domain concepts
STEP 9

Entities: When Identity Matters

What you will discover

Recognise a domain concept whose identity continues while its current attributes change, dis-
tinguish entity identity from Value Object equality, and explain why Term identity is scoped to its
AcademicYear rather than made globally unique by an invented identifier.

Step 8 ended with a question that our Value Objects cannot answer. Term 2 begins with one period:

PYTHON

1 term_2 = Term(

2       number=TermNumber(2),

3       period=DateRange(

4           date(2026, 5, 1),

5           date(2026, 7, 28),

6       ),

7)

The school then accepts an earlier opening date. The period becomes 15 April­28 July.
The old and new DateRanges are different values. Yet the administrator never speaks about deleting
one term and creating another. She says: "reschedule Term 2."
Something is continuing while one of its attributes changes.

       Ask what survived the change

The developer makes that continuity explicit.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Is this still the same Term 2?

      School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         Before the change, Term 2 runs from 1 May to 28 July. After the change, it runs from 15
                         April to 28 July. Are those two different terms?

     SA School administrator
    No. It is the same Term 2 with revised dates.

                          DEV Developer
                         So the period can change without changing which term we are talking about?

                                58
                                                                                                                                                 59

     SA School administrator
    Exactly.

                          DEV Developer
                        What would make it a different term?

     SA School administrator
    If we were talking about Term 1 or Term 3, that would be a different term. But changing
    Term 2's dates does not turn it into another term.

The DateRange lesson from Step 6 now gives us a useful contrast.
For a DateRange, changing one boundary means a different value. For a Term, changing its period
does not mean a different Term.

      Model evolution
      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Assume every domain object is defined by all of its current values.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING

     Ask whether the business tracks a continuing thing whose attributes may change over time.

   Value equality is the wrong question for Term

A DateRange is equal to another DateRange when their boundaries are equal:

PYTHON

1 first = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 5, 1),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5 second = DateRange(

6       date(2026, 5, 1),

7       date(2026, 7, 28),

8)

9

10 assert first == second

That works because the boundaries completely describe the domain value.

If we apply the same rule mechanically to Term, we get into trouble. Imagine we compare every current
attribute:

PYTHON

1 before = Term(

2       TermNumber(2),

3       DateRange(

4           date(2026, 5, 1),

5           date(2026, 7, 28),

6       ),

7)

8
                                60                                                           Step 9. Entities and Identity

                                    9 after = Term(

                                    10    TermNumber(2),

                                    11    DateRange(

                                    12        date(2026, 4, 15),

                                    13        date(2026, 7, 28),

                                    14    ),

                                    15 )

                                An all-fields comparison would say these are different because the periods differ. The school says they
                                can represent the same continuing Term 2 at different points in its life.

                                The question is therefore no longer:

                                        Do all of the current attributes have equal values?

                                It is:

                                        Are we talking about the same domain thing, even though some of its current state has
                                        changed?

                                        Now the Entity concept has earned a name

DDD CONCEPT                     Domain-Driven Design calls a domain object whose continuity is defined by identity rather than by
                                equality of all current attributes an Entity.
Entity
                                      DDD discovery: Entity
A domain object
distinguished by a continuing        Term is an Entity in the SchoolGrid model because the school tracks Term 1, Term 2, and Term
identity. Its state may change       3 as continuing concepts. A Term's period may change, but a valid reschedule does not create
over time while the business         a new Term identity.
still regards it as the same
thing.                          This does not mean that Entities must always be mutable in every possible way. It means that changes
                                to some attributes do not determine whether the Entity is the same thing.

                                    CONTRAST

                                    DateRange ­ Value Object                             Term ­ Entity
                                    Its current boundary values define what it is. Dif-  Its identity continues while its current period may
                                    ferent boundaries mean a different value.            change.

                                The distinction comes from the domain, not from whether Python happens to use a class for both.

                                       What identifies the Term?

                                The next question is unavoidable. If Term is an Entity, what identity does the school actually use?
                                The conversation so far already contains the answer: Term 1, Term 2, and Term 3. Within one Aca-
                                demicYear, the TermNumber distinguishes the Terms.
                                                                                                        61

DOMAIN WORKSHOP

Is TermNumber enough everywhere?

School administrator / Developer

DEV Developer
Within Academic Year 2026, does the number 2 tell us which term you mean?

 SA School administrator
Yes. There is only one Term 2 in that academic year.

                      DEV Developer
                    But Academic Year 2027 will also have a Term 2. Is that the same term as Term 2 of
                    2026?

 SA School administrator
No. Those belong to different academic years.

DEV Developer
So "2" identifies the Term only inside the academic year that owns it?

 SA School administrator
Correct.

This gives us a scoped identity.                                                                            MODELLING
Conceptually, these identities are different:
                                                                                                            Identity scope
     PYTHON
                                                                                                            The context within which an
     1 term_2_of_2026 = (2026, TermNumber(2))                                                               identifying value is unique.
     2 term_2_of_2027 = (2027, TermNumber(2))                                                               TermNumber 2 identifies one
                                                                                                            Term inside a particular
         3                                                                                                  AcademicYear, but the value
                                                                                                            2 is reused in other academic
     4 assert term_2_of_2026 != term_2_of_2027                                                              years.

The tuple is not our final model. It simply makes the scope visible: the same TermNumber can partici-
pate in different Term identities because the owning AcademicYear is different.

Example: The same number in different years

Given Academic Year 2026 has Term 2 and Academic Year 2027 also has Term 2.
When the two Terms are identified.
Then they are different Entities because each TermNumber is interpreted within a different Aca-
demicYear.

This is also why BR-2.3 says that a term number may occur at most once within one academic year.
Reusing TermNumber 2 in another year is expected.
                                62                                                                  Step 9. Entities and Identity

                                       We do not need to invent a global ID

                                Once the word Entity appears, software teams often reach immediately for a UUID or database primary
                                key:

                                PYTHON

                                    1 @dataclass

                                    2 class Term:

                                    3   id: str

                                    4   number: TermNumber

                                    5   period: DateRange | None = None

                                There is nothing technically impossible about such a design. The problem is that we have not discovered
                                a business need for that identifier.

                                The school already has an identity rule that makes sense in its language:

                                       Within an AcademicYear, the TermNumber identifies the Term.

READING CUE                           Model decision: Term identity is contextual

Persistence and identity             A Term is identified by its TermNumber within its owning AcademicYear. SchoolGrid does not
                                     introduce a global domain ID merely because Term is an Entity.
A database may later use a
surrogate key for persistence.  This decision may change if a later requirement creates a real need for a global identifier. Domain
That storage choice should      models are allowed to evolve with evidence.
not automatically replace the
identity that the domain uses.

                                       TermNumber identifies the Entity without becoming an Entity

                                Step 8 deliberately separated TermNumber from Term. That separation matters even more now.

                                These two values are interchangeable:

                                     PYTHON

                                     1 first = TermNumber(2)
                                     2 second = TermNumber(2)

                                         3

                                     4 assert first == second

                                There is no meaningful history of "the first 2" versus "the second 2." They are equal Value Objects.
                                But Term 2 has continuity. It can be unscheduled, scheduled, and later rescheduled while remaining
                                the same Term within its year.
                                The identifying value and the Entity it identifies therefore have different semantics:

                                Concept            What makes it equal/same?          Can current state vary?
                                DateRange
                                                   Equal boundary values              No; changed boundaries mean an-
                                TermNumber                                            other value
                                Term               Equal numeric value                No; 2 changed to 3 is another value
                                                   Same identity within its Academi-  Yes; its current period may change
                                                   cYear
                                                                                                   63

       Do not confuse Entity identity with Python object identity                                        READING CUE

There is another trap. Python's is operator asks whether two variables point to the same object in       Identifier versus Entity
                                                                                                         An identifier can itself be a
memory:                                                                                                  Value Object. That does not
                                                                                                         turn the identifier into the
                                                                                                         Entity.

PYTHON

  1 term is same_reference

That is a programming-language question, not automatically a domain identity question.

Imagine SchoolGrid saves Term 2, the process ends, and tomorrow the term is loaded again from
storage. The new Python object did not exist yesterday. It can still represent the same domain Entity:
Term 2 of Academic Year 2026.

      Misconception: Python objects and domain identity

     Likewise, two separate Python objects could accidentally claim the same scoped identity. The
     domain would not thereby gain two legitimate Term 2 Entities; it would reveal that our model or
     persistence process had allowed duplicate representations of the same identity.

KEY IDEA Entity identity belongs to the domain. Memory addresses, object references, and
database keys may help implement that identity, but they do not define it unless the domain gives
them that meaning.

   Make the current Python model stop pretending Term is a value

Python's @dataclass generates equality from all fields by default. That was useful for DateRange and

TermNumber because their fields define their values. It is misleading for Term because its period may
change without changing its identity.

For now we remove generated value equality:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass(eq=False)

2 class Term:

3       number: TermNumber

4       period: DateRange | None = None

This does not finish Entity equality for us. It simply prevents Python from silently teaching the wrong
rule: "two Terms are equal exactly when all fields match."

Because Term identity is scoped by AcademicYear, the owner will eventually be responsible for distin-

guishing and locating its Terms by TermNumber. We do not need to force a context-free Term.__eq__

implementation before that relationship is properly modelled.

       A simple continuity test

We can still make the business continuity observable without pretending that all Entity identity lives
inside Python's equality operator.
64                                                           Step 9. Entities and Identity

Start with Term 2 and remember its identifying value:

PYTHON

    1 def test_term_keeps_its_number_when_period_changes():

    2   term = Term(

    3      TermNumber(2),

    4      DateRange(

    5          date(2026, 5, 1),

    6          date(2026, 7, 28),

    7      ),

    8   )

    9   identity_within_year = term.number

    10

    11  term.period = DateRange(

    12     date(2026, 4, 15),

    13     date(2026, 7, 28),

    14  )

    15

    16  assert term.number == identity_within_year

The test demonstrates the point we need in this step: the current period changed, but the TermNumber
that identifies the Entity within its AcademicYear did not.

The direct assignment to term.period is intentionally uncomfortable. It exposes the next design

problem rather than hiding it.

       Identity alone does not protect state changes

We now know what Term is, but we still have weak behaviour:

     PYTHON

     1 term.period = another_period
Any caller can replace the period directly. Nothing in that assignment says whether the action is an
initial schedule or a reschedule. Nothing asks whether other calendar rules must be checked. Nothing
communicates the business intent.
Worse, generic field mutation makes it easy to bypass the language we worked so hard to establish:

     PYTHON

     1 term.period = new_period
versus the business statement:

         Reschedule Term 2 to a proposed period.

Knowing that Term is an Entity therefore creates a second question: how should an Entity expose
changes to its state without becoming a bag of writable fields?
                                                                                                                                           65

Try it: Find the identity, not the matching attributes

For each case, decide whether the evidence suggests the same Entity, equal Value Objects, or
different domain things. Explain the identity scope you are using.
1. Two independently constructed DateRanges both cover 1 May­28 July 2026.
2. Term 2 of Academic Year 2026 changes from 1 May­28 July to 15 April­28 July.
3. Term 2 of Academic Year 2026 and Term 2 of Academic Year 2027.
4. Term 1 and Term 2 happen to be given identical DateRanges in a broken calendar.
5. A Term 2 object is saved today and reconstructed from persistence tomorrow with the same

    AcademicYear and TermNumber.

Then explain why neither is nor equality of all dataclass fields is a safe universal definition of

Entity identity.

NEXT QUESTION

If Term is a continuing Entity, should any caller be allowed to replace its fields directly, or should
changes such as scheduling and rescheduling be expressed as meaningful domain behaviour?
Next: Step 10 ­ Entity State and Behaviour
TRACK 02 / Build the smallest domain concepts
STEP 10

Entity State and Behaviour

      What you will discover

     Replace unrestricted Entity mutation with intention-revealing behaviour, distinguish observa-
     tions from state-changing operations, and identify which rules a Term can enforce using its
     own state and which rules require wider AcademicYear context.

Step 9 established that Term is an Entity. Its TermNumber identifies it within an AcademicYear, while
its current DateRange may change without creating a new Term.
But the implementation ended in an uncomfortable place:

     PYTHON

     1 term.period = new_period
That line changes state, but it says almost nothing about the business action that caused the change.
Was the Term previously unscheduled? Is this its first schedule? Is this a reschedule? Is the caller
even allowed to replace the period?
The model now knows what Term is, but it does not yet control how Term changes.

       A writable field hides the business event

The developer shows the assignment to the administrator.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     What does "set the period" mean?

       School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         When the dates change, I can simply assign a new DateRange to the Term's period.

     SA School administrator
    But why are the dates changing?

                          DEV Developer
                         The code does not say. It just replaces the field.

     SA School administrator
    That matters. If the Term has never had dates, we are scheduling it. If it already has
    dates, we are rescheduling it.

                                                                  66
                                                                                                                                                 67

                          DEV Developer
                         So the same field assignment is hiding two different business actions?

     SA School administrator
    Exactly. And I would not expect someone to "reschedule" a Term that has never been
    scheduled.

The distinction was already present in the ubiquitous language from Step 4. The code has simply failed
to preserve it.

      Model evolution
      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Expose writable state and let callers decide what an assignment means.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING

     Expose operations that state the business intention and let the Entity protect rules it can decide
     locally.

       Begin with the Entity's possible local states

Because SchoolGrid allows an AcademicYear to be configured progressively, a Term may exist before
it has dates. We therefore have at least two meaningful local states:

        Term state           Meaning
        Unscheduled
        Scheduled            The Term exists but does not yet have an accepted Dat-
                             eRange.
                             The Term currently has an accepted DateRange.

We do not need a separate status field to represent this yet. The existing period already tells us which
state the Term is in.

Instead of accepting the period directly through a public constructor field, we can let a new Term begin
unscheduled:

PYTHON

1 class Term:

2       def __init__(self, number):

3       self._number = number

4       self._period = None

The TermNumber should also not be casually replaced. It participates in the Term's identity within its                                               READING CUE
AcademicYear. We therefore expose observations through read-only properties:
                                                                                                                                                     Python conventions
PYTHON
                                                                                                                                                     The leading underscore is a
1 @property                                                                                                                                          Python convention indicating
                                                                                                                                                     that these attributes are
2 def number(self):                                                                                                                                  internal implementation
                                                                                                                                                     details. It is not an
3       return self._number                                                                                                                          impenetrable security
                                                                                                                                                     boundary. The domain API
4                                                                                                                                                    we design around them is
                                                                                                                                                     what communicates the
5 @property                                                                                                                                          supported way to work with
6 def period(self):                                                                                                                                  the Entity.
68                                                                 Step 10. Entity State and Behaviour

    7   return self._period

Now callers can ask which Term this is and inspect its current period without a public setter advertising
unrestricted mutation.

       Observation does not have to expose mutation

The first useful behaviour does not change anything. We often need to ask whether a Term has been
scheduled yet.

PYTHON

    1 @property

    2 def is_scheduled(self):

    3   return self._period is not None

A test records the initial state:

PYTHON

    1 def test_new_term_starts_unscheduled():

    2   term = Term(TermNumber(2))

    3

    4   assert not term.is_scheduled

    5   assert term.period is None

This is an observation: it reports something about the Entity without changing its state.

That distinction will help us keep tests focused. A test that wants to know whether a Term is scheduled
should ask the model directly rather than infer the answer from incidental storage details elsewhere.

       The first state change is scheduling

The administrator has already defined schedule: give a Term its period when it is not yet scheduled.
We can make that operation explicit:

PYTHON

    1 def schedule(self, period):

    2   if self.is_scheduled:

    3      raise ValueError("term is already scheduled")

    4

    5   self._period = period

The simplest successful example now reads like the school action:

PYTHON

    1 def test_schedule_assigns_the_first_period():

    2   term = Term(TermNumber(2))

    3   period = DateRange(

    4      date(2026, 5, 1),

    5      date(2026, 7, 28),

    6   )

    7

    8   term.schedule(period)
                                                                 69

9

10      assert term.is_scheduled

11      assert term.period == period

Compare that with a generic assignment:

    PYTHON

     1 term.period = period

The method call carries substantially more domain meaning:

     PYTHON

     1 term.schedule(period)

The difference is not cosmetic. schedule can also protect the local transition rule that an already

scheduled Term cannot be scheduled for the first time again.

    A rejected local transition must preserve the current state

Suppose Term 2 already has its accepted period. Calling schedule again is not another initial sched-

ule.

A test should verify both rejection and preservation of the existing state:

PYTHON

1 def test_schedule_rejects_an_already_scheduled_term():

2       term = Term(TermNumber(2))

3       original = DateRange(

4          date(2026, 5, 1),

5          date(2026, 7, 28),

6       )

7       term.schedule(original)

8

9       with pytest.raises(ValueError):

10         term.schedule(

11            DateRange(

12               date(2026, 4, 15),

13               date(2026, 7, 28),

14            )

15         )

16

17      assert term.period == original

Here the Term has enough information to enforce the rule by itself: it knows whether it already has a  READING CUE
period.
                                                                                                       Rejection preserves state
      Model decision: Term owns its local scheduling transition                                        The final assertion matters. A
                                                                                                       rejected operation should not
    An unscheduled Term may receive its first DateRange through schedule. A Term that already          leave the Entity half changed.

     has a period rejects another initial scheduling attempt. This decision requires only the Term's
     own current state.
70                                                        Step 10. Entity State and Behaviour

        Changing an existing schedule deserves a different verb

When Term 2 already has dates, the school does not call the next change schedule. It calls it resched-
ule.

The local state transition can therefore be expressed separately:

    PYTHON

    1 def reschedule(self, new_period):

    2       if not self.is_scheduled:

    3          raise ValueError("term is not scheduled")

    4

    5       self._period = new_period

This method can reject a misuse that requires no information outside the Term:

    PYTHON

    1 def test_unscheduled_term_cannot_be_rescheduled():

    2       term = Term(TermNumber(2))

    3

    4       with pytest.raises(ValueError):

    5          term.reschedule(

    6             DateRange(

    7                date(2026, 4, 15),

    8                date(2026, 7, 28),

    9             )

    10         )

    11

    12      assert term.period is None

Once the Term is scheduled, a local reschedule replaces its current DateRange while its identifying
TermNumber remains unchanged:

    PYTHON

    1 def test_reschedule_changes_period_not_identity():

    2       term = Term(TermNumber(2))

    3       term.schedule(

    4          DateRange(

    5             date(2026, 5, 1),

    6             date(2026, 7, 28),

    7          )

    8       )

    9

    10      term.reschedule(

    11         DateRange(

    12            date(2026, 4, 15),

    13            date(2026, 7, 28),

    14         )

    15      )

    16

    17      assert term.number == TermNumber(2)

    18      assert term.period == DateRange(

    19         date(2026, 4, 15),

    20         date(2026, 7, 28),

    21      )

This is the Entity behaviour Step 9 was preparing us for: the Entity continues while part of its current
                                                                                                                                                 71
state changes.

    An Entity can also answer questions about itself

Behaviour is not limited to commands that modify state. A Term can answer useful questions using the
Value Objects it owns.

Suppose the attendance subsystem later asks whether Term 2 occurs on 28 July. The Term does not
need to expose date arithmetic to the caller. It can delegate the factual date question to its DateRange:

PYTHON

1 def occurs_on(self, day):

2       if not self.is_scheduled:

3          return False

4

5       return self._period.includes(day)

The test remains expressed in domain language:

PYTHON

1 def test_scheduled_term_occurs_on_its_closing_day():

2       term = Term(TermNumber(2))

3       term.schedule(

4          DateRange(

5             date(2026, 5, 1),

6             date(2026, 7, 28),

7          )

8       )

9

10      assert term.occurs_on(date(2026, 7, 28))

There is a useful division of responsibility here. Term answers the domain question "does this Term
occur on this day?" while DateRange performs the inclusive membership calculation.

KEY IDEA Rich domain behaviour does not mean placing every rule in one class. A Term should ex-
press questions and transitions that belong to the Term, while delegating smaller value calculations
to the Value Objects that already know how to answer them.

    Intention-revealing methods are not just renamed setters

It would be easy to write this and claim victory:

PYTHON

1 def set_period(self, period):

2       self._period = period

Misconception: A method is not automatically domain behaviour

That method hides the assignment behind a function call, but it still does not say why the state
is changing or which transition rules apply.

Compare the vocabulary:
                               72                                                              Step 10. Entity State and Behaviour

                               Operation                 What the name communicates

                               set_period(period)        A technical field is being replaced. Business intention remains unclear.
                               schedule(period)          An unscheduled Term is receiving its first accepted period.
                               reschedule(period)        A scheduled Term is moving to a different accepted period.
                               occurs_on(day)            A question is being asked about whether this Term includes a day.

MODELLING                      An intention-revealing operation makes the reason for the action visible in the model.

Intention-revealing            The benefit is deeper than readability. Different intentions can carry different preconditions, rules, and
operation                      consequences.

A method whose name and               The Term can protect only what it knows
contract express the domain
action or question being       At this point the design looks stronger. A caller cannot use the supported API to reschedule an un-
performed rather than merely   scheduled Term, and a second initial schedule is rejected.
exposing the object's storage  Now consider the boundary example that has followed us since Step 1.
mechanics.                     Term 1 is already scheduled through 28 March:

                                   PYTHON

                                   1 term_1 = Term(TermNumber(1))

                                   2 term_1.schedule(

                                   3       DateRange(

                                   4          date(2026, 1, 1),

                                   5          date(2026, 3, 28),

                                   6       )

                                   7)

                               Term 2 currently runs from 1 May through 28 July:

                                   PYTHON

                                   1 term_2 = Term(TermNumber(2))

                                   2 term_2.schedule(

                                   3       DateRange(

                                   4          date(2026, 5, 1),

                                   5          date(2026, 7, 28),

                                   6       )

                                   7)

                               Now somebody proposes this reschedule:

                                   PYTHON

                                   1 term_2.reschedule(

                                   2       DateRange(

                                   3          date(2026, 3, 28),

                                   4          date(2026, 7, 28),

                                   5       )

                                   6)

                               From Term 2's local point of view, nothing is obviously wrong:

                               · Term 2 is already scheduled, so rescheduling is a meaningful transition;
                               · the proposed DateRange is chronological;
                                                                                                                                                 73
· TermNumber 2 remains unchanged.
Yet the calendar is wrong. Term 1 and Term 2 now both include 28 March.

       Giving Term more methods will not give it missing information

We could try to make Term.reschedule reject the conflict, but what would it compare against?

Term 2 currently knows its own number and its own period. It does not know the period of Term 1 or
Term 3. It does not know which other Terms belong to Academic Year 2026. It therefore lacks the
information required to enforce BR-2.6.
Passing all sibling terms into every Entity method would technically make the information available:

     PYTHON

     1 term_2.reschedule(new_period, all_other_terms)

But that signature is telling us something important: the decision is no longer about Term 2 alone. We
would be forcing a wider calendar responsibility into one child Entity.

CONTRAST

Local Term rule                            Calendar rule
"Can an unscheduled Term be rescheduled?"
Term can answer from its own state.        "Would this proposed Term 2 period conflict with
                                           another Term?" The answer requires the other
                                           Terms in the AcademicYear.

The information needed by a rule is again showing us where responsibility cannot live.

       A locally valid operation can still be globally unacceptable

This is the same distinction we first saw with DateRange, now at the Entity level.
A DateRange may be internally valid. A Term may be in a state where rescheduling is locally meaningful.
The proposed change can still be unacceptable when the Term is considered together with the rest of
the AcademicYear.

      Example: The Entity cannot see the conflict

     Given Term 1 ends on 28 March and Term 2 is already scheduled later in the year.
     When Term 2 is proposed to be rescheduled so that it opens on 28 March.
     Then the proposed DateRange is valid and Term 2 is locally allowed to be rescheduled, but the
     complete calendar must reject the change because both Terms would claim the same day.

This exposes a limitation in our current public reschedule operation. The method is capable of apply-

ing a locally meaningful state change before the wider calendar has approved it.
We should not solve that problem by teaching Term about every other Term. Instead, we need to
discover the model boundary that owns the information required to approve the change before the
Entity is mutated.
74                                                              Step 10. Entity State and Behaviour

       Tests should use behaviour, not reach through the model

The shift from writable fields to supported operations also changes how we test. A test should prefer
this:

     PYTHON

     1 term.schedule(period)

         2

     3 assert term.is_scheduled
     4 assert term.period == period

over reaching into the Entity's internal representation:

     PYTHON

     1 term._period = period
     2 assert term._period == period

The second test is tightly coupled to the current storage choice. It can remain green even while bypass-
ing every domain transition we intended the Entity to protect.
Tests should observe supported outcomes: current period, scheduling status, identity, occurrence on
a date, or a raised domain error. That gives the implementation room to change without weakening the
business contract.

      Model decision: Expose Entity behaviour, not general-purpose mutation

    Term exposes domain questions and state transitions such as is_scheduled, occurs_on,
    schedule, and reschedule. Its internal attributes are not the public business API. Rules

     requiring other Terms remain outside Term because the Entity does not have the information
     needed to decide them.

       What we have gained--and what is still missing

Term now has a clearer role in the model:

Term can decide                       Term cannot decide alone

Whether it currently has a period     Whether another Term has the same number
Whether an initial schedule is being  Whether its proposed period overlaps another Term
attempted twice
Whether an unscheduled Term is be-    Whether its dates comply with the AcademicYear's wider calendar policy
ing rescheduled
Whether it occurs on a given day      Whether the complete year remains chronologically consistent

The right-hand column is now the important one. Several business rules are not owned by any individual
DateRange or Term because their truth emerges only when otherwise valid objects are considered
together.

That is the pressure that moves us into the next part of the book.
                                                                                                                                           75

Try it: Separate local behaviour from coordinating behaviour

For each proposed operation, decide whether Term has enough information to handle it by itself.
If not, state what additional information is missing.
1. Ask whether an unscheduled Term has a current period.
2. Give an unscheduled Term its first valid DateRange.
3. Reschedule a Term that has never been scheduled.
4. Ask whether Term 2 occurs on 28 July.
5. Reschedule Term 2 to begin on 28 March when Term 1 ends on 28 March.
6. Add a second Term 2 to Academic Year 2026.
7. Reschedule Term 3 to close in January 2027 under SchoolGrid's current 2026 calendar-year

    policy.
Then explain why adding more code to Term cannot solve a rule when the Entity does not
possess the information required to evaluate that rule.

NEXT QUESTION

If a DateRange can be valid and a Term can be locally valid, yet their combination with other Terms
can still make the calendar invalid, what part of the model should protect consistency across those
related objects?

Next: Step 11 ­ When Valid Objects Become Invalid Together
TRACK 03 / Discover aggregates through pressure
STEP 11

When Valid Objects Become Invalid
Together

What you will discover

Distinguish local object validity from consistency among related objects, identify the informa-
tion required to validate a calendar-wide change, and explain why neither DateRange nor an
individual Term can protect rules that depend on sibling Terms.

Step 10 ended with a troubling result. Our smaller objects can all be behaving correctly and the school
calendar can still become wrong.

Term 1 is scheduled from 1 January through 28 March:

PYTHON

1 term_1 = Term(TermNumber(1))

2 term_1.schedule(

3       DateRange(

4          date(2026, 1, 1),

5          date(2026, 3, 28),

6       )

7)

Term 2 is scheduled from 1 May through 28 July:

PYTHON

1 term_2 = Term(TermNumber(2))

2 term_2.schedule(

3       DateRange(

4          date(2026, 5, 1),

5          date(2026, 7, 28),

6       )

7)

Now someone proposes moving Term 2 so that it begins on 28 March:

PYTHON

1 proposed = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 3, 28),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

Nothing inside that DateRange is invalid. It opens before it closes. Term 2 is already scheduled, so a
reschedule is locally meaningful. TermNumber 2 is still a valid term number.

Yet the proposed calendar is unacceptable.

                                                 76
                                                                                                                                                 77

       The school sees a conflict that no individual object sees

The developer walks through the proposal with the administrator.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Everything is valid. Why is the calendar wrong?

      School administrator / Developer

                          DEV Developer
                         The new Term 2 period is a valid DateRange. Term 2 is allowed to be rescheduled. Its
                         number is still valid. Why should the request fail?

     SA School administrator
    Because Term 1 already includes 28 March. Term 2 cannot also begin on that day.

                          DEV Developer
                         So neither object is broken by itself?

     SA School administrator
    Correct. The problem appears when you put the two Terms together in the same
    academic year.

                          DEV Developer
                         And if Term 2 began on 29 March instead?

     SA School administrator
    Then it would no longer share that day with Term 1. We would still check the other rules,
    but that particular conflict would be gone.

This is a different kind of modelling problem from the ones we solved in Steps 6 through 10.
A DateRange could protect its own chronology. A TermNumber could protect its own allowed values. A
Term could protect whether scheduling or rescheduling made sense for its own state.
Now the truth of the rule depends on several individually valid objects considered together.

      Model evolution
      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Ask whether each object is valid in isolation.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING

     Ask whether the accepted combination of related objects is valid as a whole.

       Make the shared-day conflict explicit

The DateRange behaviour from Step 7 can expose the factual relationship:
78                                                              Step 11. Valid Objects, Invalid Calendar

    PYTHON

    1 term_1_period = DateRange(

    2       date(2026, 1, 1),

    3       date(2026, 3, 28),

    4)

    5

    6 proposed_term_2_period = DateRange(

    7       date(2026, 3, 28),

    8       date(2026, 7, 28),

    9)

    10

    11 assert term_1_period.overlaps(

    12      proposed_term_2_period

    13 )

Both DateRanges are valid. Their relationship is the problem.

Because the boundaries are inclusive, 28 March belongs to both ranges. The existing overlaps be-

haviour correctly reports that fact.

But notice what DateRange does not say. It does not say:

        These two periods are forbidden in Academic Year 2026.

That would be too much responsibility. DateRange knows only that two spans share a day. It does
not know whether the spans belong to school Terms, holiday windows, examination periods, or some
completely different part of the system.

    CONTRAST

    DateRange fact                                      School calendar decision
    These two inclusive ranges overlap on at least one  These two numbered Terms may not occupy over-
    day.                                                lapping periods in the same AcademicYear.

The calculation is local to DateRange. The permission is not.

       Term 2 cannot decide by looking harder at itself

Perhaps the rule belongs in Term.reschedule. That method is where the change happens, so the

idea is initially attractive.
But Term 2 contains only its own information:

    PYTHON

     1 number = term_2.number
     2 current_period = term_2.period

From those values alone, Term 2 cannot answer any of these questions:

· What period does Term 1 currently use?
· Has Term 3 already been scheduled?
· Does another Term already use TermNumber 2?
· Which AcademicYear owns these Terms?
                                                                                                   79

· Would the proposed period place the year into an invalid overall order?

We could pass the missing information into the method:                                                    READING CUE

PYTHON                                                                                                    Missing information
                                                                                                          No additional conditional
1 term_2.reschedule(                                                                                      inside Term 2 can
                                                                                                          manufacture information the
2       proposed,                                                                                         Entity does not possess.

3       term_1,

4       term_3,

5       academic_year,

6)

But the awkward signature is evidence. The business decision is no longer about Term 2 alone. We
are trying to make one Entity coordinate objects that belong to a wider calendar.

KEY IDEA A rule cannot live meaningfully inside an object that lacks the information required to
decide it. Passing the whole surrounding model into a child object is often evidence that the re-
sponsibility belongs at a wider level.

   Return to the provisional AcademicYear

Back in Step 5, before we knew the DDD patterns involved, the rules forced us to sketch a wider concept:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass

2 class AcademicYear:

3       year: int

4       terms: list[Term]

At the time this was only a provisional representation. It stored the year and its Terms, but it did not
protect them.

The shared-day conflict now tells us why this concept matters. AcademicYear is the smallest concept
we have identified that can naturally answer questions such as:

   What Terms are already accepted in Academic Year 2026, and would this proposed
   change leave them mutually consistent?

That question requires the year together with the Terms that belong to it.

We still have not decided the final design. The important discovery is the information boundary of the
rule.

       List the evidence needed before changing anything

Consider the request:

         Reschedule Term 2 of Academic Year 2026 to 28 March­28 July.

Before the accepted state changes, the model needs enough information to evaluate at least the rules
already discovered.
80                                                              Step 11. Valid Objects, Invalid Calendar

Question                                  Information required

Is the proposed period internally valid?  The proposed DateRange itself.
Is TermNumber 2 permitted?                The TermNumber value itself.
Does Term 2 already exist in this year?   The Terms belonging to AcademicYear 2026.
Does the proposal overlap another         The proposed DateRange plus periods of the other scheduled Terms.
Term?
Does numbering still match chronol-       Term numbers and periods across the scheduled Terms.
ogy?
Do the dates remain inside the 2026       The AcademicYear value plus the proposed period.
teaching policy?

Different rules need different amounts of context. The important point is that some of them require the
same cluster of information: the AcademicYear and its Terms.

       The 28 March and 29 March examples reveal the boundary precisely

The best boundary examples change one fact at a time.

Term 1 remains:

PYTHON

    1 term_1_period = DateRange(

    2     date(2026, 1, 1),

    3     date(2026, 3, 28),

    4)

First proposal:

PYTHON

    1 starts_on_same_day = DateRange(

    2     date(2026, 3, 28),

    3     date(2026, 7, 28),

    4)

    5

    6 assert term_1_period.overlaps(

    7     starts_on_same_day

    8)

Second proposal:

PYTHON

    1 starts_next_day = DateRange(

    2     date(2026, 3, 29),

    3     date(2026, 7, 28),

    4)

    5

    6 assert not term_1_period.overlaps(

    7     starts_next_day

    8)

The only changed fact is the opening date. The first proposal shares 28 March; the second does not.
This gives us a strong calendar-level expectation:
                                                                                                                                           81

Example: One day changes the calendar result

Given Term 1 of Academic Year 2026 ends on 28 March.
When Term 2 is proposed to open on 28 March.
Then the calendar rejects the proposal because the Terms would share a day.

Example: The next day clears this conflict

Given Term 1 of Academic Year 2026 ends on 28 March.
When Term 2 is proposed to open on 29 March.
Then the proposal clears the shared-day rule, although the remaining AcademicYear rules must
still be checked.

       The test we need is no longer an isolated object test                                                                                   READING CUE

A DateRange test can prove that overlap calculation works. A Term test can prove that rescheduling                                             One rule is not the whole
an already scheduled Term is a meaningful local transition. Neither test can prove that the complete                                           decision
AcademicYear remains valid.
                                                                                                                                               That final qualification
We now need an executable example at the calendar level. Before deciding the final implementation,                                             matters. Passing one rule
the test we want to be able to write looks conceptually like this:                                                                             does not automatically prove
                                                                                                                                               that the whole proposed
                                                                                                                                               calendar is acceptable.

PYTHON

1 def test_year_rejects_shared_day_between_terms():

2       year = AcademicYear(2026)

3       year.schedule_term(

4          TermNumber(1),

5          DateRange(

6              date(2026, 1, 1),

7              date(2026, 3, 28),

8          ),

9       )

10      year.schedule_term(

11         TermNumber(2),

12         DateRange(

13             date(2026, 5, 1),

14             date(2026, 7, 28),

15         ),

16      )

17

18      with pytest.raises(ValueError):

19         year.reschedule_term(

20             TermNumber(2),

21             DateRange(

22                 date(2026, 3, 28),

23                 date(2026, 7, 28),

24             ),

25         )

The methods in this test are not yet an implementation commitment. The test is a way of expressing
the business outcome at the level where the required information appears to exist.

Most importantly, the example asks the AcademicYear to approve the change rather than mutating Term
2 first and checking the damage afterwards.
82                                                       Step 11. Valid Objects, Invalid Calendar

       Rejection must preserve the accepted calendar

The requirement from BR-2.7 now becomes more important.
Suppose Term 2 currently has this accepted period:

PYTHON

    1 original = DateRange(

    2   date(2026, 5, 1),

    3   date(2026, 7, 28),

    4)

A dangerous sequence would be:

     PYTHON

     1 term_2.reschedule(proposed)
     2 check_the_rest_of_the_calendar()

If the second line discovers the overlap after Term 2 has already changed, the system must repair or
roll back the invalid state.
A safer domain sequence is conceptually the reverse:

     PYTHON

     1 check_proposed_calendar_change()
     2 apply_change_only_if_accepted()

    Model decision: Validate before replacing accepted state

    The exact implementation is still ahead of us, but the business requirement is already clear:
    validate the proposed whole before replacing accepted state.

A stronger test therefore includes the state-preservation assertion:

PYTHON

    1 with pytest.raises(ValueError):

    2   year.reschedule_term(

    3      TermNumber(2),

    4      proposed,

    5   )

    6

    7 assert year.term(TermNumber(2)).period == original

The rejected request must leave the previously accepted Term 2 period untouched.

       This problem is larger than overlap

The 28 March example is our clearest illustration, but it is not the only rule with this shape.
Consider what else can become invalid only when objects are viewed together:

· two individually valid Terms can use the same TermNumber in one year;
· two individually valid DateRanges can overlap;
· individually valid Terms can appear in an order that contradicts their numbers;
                                                                                                                                                 83

· a valid DateRange can belong to the wrong calendar year under SchoolGrid's teaching policy.

These are not four unrelated implementation accidents. They are evidence that a set of business rules
governs the AcademicYear and its Terms as a coordinated whole.

      Model decision: Do not push calendar-wide rules into child objects

     DateRange protects DateRange validity. TermNumber protects the permitted numeric value.
     Term protects transitions it can decide from its own state. Rules that require several Terms
     or the owning year must be evaluated with the AcademicYear context before accepted state
     changes.

       A relationship alone is not yet the solution

It might be tempting to stop here and say:

   AcademicYear contains a list of Terms, therefore the modelling problem is solved.

But storage is not protection. With the provisional public list, callers could still bypass every rule:

PYTHON

1 year.terms.append(

2       Term(TermNumber(2))

3)

or obtain a Term and mutate it directly before the wider calendar has approved the change.
The real problem is therefore not merely that AcademicYear references Terms. The problem is deciding
how the model should treat this group when rules must remain true across all of them.
That is the new design pressure.

       The question has changed again

At the start of Part II we asked what individual concepts meant. Then we asked how an Entity could
protect its own state transitions.
We now have a different question:

         When several related objects must obey rules together, what boundary should the model
         establish so that every supported change preserves those rules?

We have enough evidence to answer that question in the next step. Only now has the problem earned
the next DDD pattern.
84  Step 11. Valid Objects, Invalid Calendar

    Try it: Find the smallest context that can decide the rule

    For each business question below, identify the minimum information required to answer it. Then
    decide whether DateRange, TermNumber, Term, or AcademicYear has that information.
    1. Does 20 May­1 May describe a valid date range?
    2. Is 4 a valid term number?
    3. Is this unscheduled Term allowed to be rescheduled?
    4. Does the proposed Term 2 period overlap Term 1?
    5. Is there already another Term 2 in Academic Year 2026?
    6. Would accepting the proposal preserve chronological ordering of all scheduled Terms?
    7. If a proposal is rejected, which previously accepted state must remain unchanged?
    Finally, explain why simply giving Term more methods does not solve questions whose answers
    depend on sibling Terms it cannot see.

    NEXT QUESTION

    If AcademicYear and its Terms must obey several business rules together, what DDD pattern defines
    the consistency boundary within which those rules must be protected?

    Next: Step 12 ­ Aggregates: Protecting Consistency Boundaries
TRACK 03 / Discover aggregates through pressure
STEP 12

Aggregates: Protecting Consistency
Boundaries

What you will discover

Derive an Aggregate from business rules that must hold across related objects, explain the
meaning of a consistency boundary, and distinguish Aggregate membership from ordinary ob-
ject relationships or broad real-world ownership.

Step 11 gave us the evidence before giving us the pattern.

Term 1 can be valid. Term 2 can be valid. Their DateRanges can each be valid. Their TermNumbers
can each be valid. Yet the AcademicYear can still become invalid when those otherwise valid pieces
are combined.

The clearest example remains the shared boundary day:

PYTHON

1 term_1_period = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 1, 1),

3       date(2026, 3, 28),

4)

5

6 proposed_term_2_period = DateRange(

7       date(2026, 3, 28),

8       date(2026, 7, 28),

9)

Both values satisfy the DateRange invariant. But they cannot be accepted as the periods of Term 1 and
Term 2 in the same AcademicYear because both include 28 March.

The rule therefore does not belong to either DateRange in isolation. Nor can Term 2 decide it from its
own state. The decision requires a wider group of objects to remain correct together.

       The school does not approve a Term in isolation

The developer now asks the question that Step 11 made unavoidable.

                                       85
                                86                                              Step 12. Discovering Aggregates

                                    DOMAIN WORKSHOP

                                    What exactly has to stay correct together?

                                    School administrator / Developer

                                    DEV Developer
                                    When you approve Term 2's dates, are you approving only Term 2?

                                     SA School administrator
                                    No. I need to know that the academic year still makes sense after the change.

                                    DEV Developer
                                    So I must compare the proposal with the other Terms already accepted for that year?

                                     SA School administrator
                                    Yes. Term 2 cannot be approved without considering Term 1 and, when it exists, Term 3.

                                                          DEV Developer
                                                        Would I also need every learner, teacher, subject, and fee record before approving the
                                                        dates?

                                     SA School administrator
                                    No. Those are different concerns. For this decision I need the academic year and its term
                                    schedule.

MODELLING                       That last answer is crucial. The consistency problem is wider than one Term, but it is not as wide as
                                the whole school.
Boundary from rules
                                      Model evolution
A modelling boundary should
be justified by the rules that        INITIAL INTERPRETATION
must hold together, not
merely by the fact that              Group objects because they are related in the real world.
objects are associated in the
real world.                           REVISED UNDERSTANDING

                                     Group the smallest set of model objects whose business rules must remain consistent together
                                     when state changes.

DDD CONCEPT                            Now the Aggregate concept has earned a name

Aggregate                       Domain-Driven Design calls such a consistency boundary an Aggregate.
                                In SchoolGrid, the evidence points to the AcademicYear and its Terms.
A cluster of domain objects     Why?
treated as one consistency      Because several rules require that exact context:
boundary for changes. The
boundary is chosen so that      · a TermNumber may occur only once within an AcademicYear;
the business invariants that    · scheduled Term periods may not overlap;
must hold together can be       · chronology must follow TermNumber order;
protected together.
                                                                                                                                                 87

· under the current teaching policy, scheduled periods must remain inside the AcademicYear's calendar
   year;

· a rejected scheduling change must leave the previously accepted calendar unchanged.

No individual Term has enough information to guarantee all of these rules. The AcademicYear together
with its Terms does.

      DDD discovery: The SchoolGrid calendar Aggregate

     For the calendar problem we are modelling, AcademicYear and its Terms form one consistency
     boundary. Changes to the schedule must preserve the rules that govern that group as a whole.

      Misconception: Aggregate does not mean a list

     The word Aggregate does not mean "a class containing a list." It describes a modelling commit-
     ment about consistency.

   A list of Terms was not enough

We already had this provisional class in Step 5:

PYTHON

1 @dataclass

2 class AcademicYear:

3       year: int

4       terms: list[Term]

At that stage it was merely a data structure. A caller could still do this:

PYTHON

1 year.terms.append(

2       Term(TermNumber(2))

3)

or change a child Term independently:

PYTHON

  1 term_2.reschedule(proposed_period)

Neither operation guarantees that the AcademicYear remains valid.
So the relationship

   AcademicYear has Terms

is not what makes the model an Aggregate.
The stronger statement is:

   These objects participate in business rules that must be preserved together whenever the
   accepted calendar changes.
                            88                                                                           Step 12. Discovering Aggregates

                                KEY IDEA Aggregate boundaries are discovered from consistency rules, not from object contain-
                                ment alone. "Has many" is a structural relationship; "must remain valid together" is a consistency
                                relationship.

                                   The boundary answers a practical question

                            Imagine that Academic Year 2026 currently contains:

                                Term    Accepted period

                                Term 1  1 January­28 March 2026
                                Term 2  1 May­28 July 2026
                                Term 3  not yet scheduled

                            The school proposes moving Term 2 to 28 March­28 July.
                            To decide whether the change is acceptable, the model needs the proposed Term 2 period and the
                            existing schedule in the same AcademicYear. It does not need the entire SchoolGrid database.
                            That gives the boundary a concrete purpose:

                                Inside this boundary are the objects whose state must be examined together before this
                                calendar change can be accepted.

                            This is what consistency boundary means in this example.

DDD CONCEPT                        The boundary is not "everything connected to AcademicYear"

Consistency boundary        Real school concepts have many relationships. An AcademicYear may eventually be associated with
                            learners, teachers, subjects, timetables, examinations, fees, and attendance records.
The boundary inside which   That does not mean all of those objects belong in this Aggregate.
the model promises to
preserve the relevant               DOMAIN WORKSHOP
business invariants when a
supported change is              Should the whole school be one Aggregate?
completed.
                                  School administrator / Developer

                                        DEV Developer

                                        Everything in SchoolGrid belongs to the school somehow. Would it be safer to put
                                        learners, teachers, fees, subjects, attendance, and the calendar inside one big
                                        Aggregate?

                                 SA School administrator
                                Would changing a teacher's phone number require us to reapprove the Term dates?

                                                      DEV Developer
                                                    No. Those rules are unrelated.

                                 SA School administrator
                                Then why should those records be part of the same consistency decision?
                                                                                                          89

                      DEV Developer
                    They should not. The calendar boundary should contain only what the calendar rules
                    need.

 SA School administrator
Exactly. Being related to the same school is not enough.

Suppose a teacher's phone number changes. Does SchoolGrid need to load Term 1, Term 2, and Term
3 and revalidate calendar chronology before accepting the new phone number? No.

Suppose a learner's address changes. Must the academic calendar be locked and validated at the
same time? Again, no.

Those changes do not participate in the calendar invariants we are protecting.

CONTRAST

Ordinary relationship                                 Aggregate membership

Two concepts are associated or refer to one an-       Objects participate in invariants that must remain
other, but their state does not have to be validated  true together when the aggregate's accepted state
as one unit for this business rule.                   changes.

This keeps the boundary deliberately small.                                                                   MODELLING

A gigantic "School Aggregate" containing every school-related object would make nearly every operation        Aggregate membership
part of one consistency problem. That would be both a poor reflection of the business rules and an
expensive implementation constraint.                                                                          An object belongs inside an
                                                                                                              Aggregate because its state
      Model decision: Keep the calendar boundary focused                                                      participates in invariants the
                                                                                                              Aggregate must protect, not
     For the current SchoolGrid model, the calendar Aggregate contains the AcademicYear and its               simply because another
     Terms, including the Value Objects that form each Term's state. Learners, teachers, subjects,            object stores a reference to it.
     fees, attendance, and unrelated school concerns remain outside because the calendar invari-
     ants discovered so far do not require them to change consistently with the Term schedule.

       Value Objects participate without creating new identity problems

Inside a Term we already use two Value Objects:

     PYTHON

     1 number: TermNumber
     2 period: DateRange | None

They naturally participate in the Aggregate state because they describe the Term. But they do not need
independent identity inside the boundary.
If Term 2 is rescheduled, the old DateRange is replaced by another DateRange value. If the TermNum-

ber is 2, any independently constructed equal TermNumber(2) represents the same value.

The identity question remains centred on the Entities:

         Academic Year 2026 contains Term 1, Term 2, and Term 3 as continuing domain things;
         their Value Objects describe their current state.
                             90                                                          Step 12. Discovering Aggregates

                             This is one reason DDD distinguishes Entities from Value Objects before Aggregate design. The Ag-
                             gregate boundary may contain both, but they play different roles.

                                     Move the test to the consistency boundary

                             Step 11 sketched the test we now need. We can make its purpose explicit:

                             PYTHON

                                 1 def test_year_rejects_overlapping_term_periods():

                                 2   year = AcademicYear(2026)

                                 3   year.schedule_term(

                                 4      TermNumber(1),

                                 5      DateRange(

                                 6          date(2026, 1, 1),

                                 7          date(2026, 3, 28),

                                 8      ),

                                 9   )

                                 10  year.schedule_term(

                                 11     TermNumber(2),

                                 12     DateRange(

                                 13         date(2026, 5, 1),

                                 14         date(2026, 7, 28),

                                 15     ),

                                 16  )

                                 17

                                 18  with pytest.raises(ValueError):

                                 19     year.reschedule_term(

                                 20         TermNumber(2),

                                 21         DateRange(

                                 22                  date(2026, 3, 28),

                                 23                  date(2026, 7, 28),

                                 24         ),

                                 25     )

                             This is different from our earlier tests.
                             A DateRange test needs only one or two values. A Term test needs one Entity. This test deliberately
                             needs several pieces of Aggregate state because the rule itself spans them.
                             That is not accidental test setup. It mirrors the business dependency of the rule.

TESTING                              The Aggregate test should also protect the old accepted state

Aggregate-level example      Rejecting the bad proposal is not enough. The previously accepted calendar must remain intact.

A test belongs at Aggregate  So the test continues:
level when the business
outcome cannot be decided
from one child object in
isolation.

                             PYTHON

                                 1 assert year.term(TermNumber(2)).period == DateRange(

                                 2   date(2026, 5, 1),

                                 3   date(2026, 7, 28),

                                 4)

                             The rejected 28 March proposal must not partially replace Term 2's period.
                             That gives us the essential change sequence inside this consistency boundary:
                                                                                                                                                 91

     PYTHON

     1 validate_proposed_state()
     2 apply_change_only_if_valid()

The order matters.
If the model mutates Term 2 first and validates the AcademicYear afterwards, then an invalid Aggregate
state exists between those operations. The code must then repair or roll back the damage.
If it evaluates the proposed state first, the accepted Aggregate remains valid when the proposal is
rejected.

      Example: Reject before changing accepted state

     Given Academic Year 2026 contains Term 1 ending on 28 March and Term 2 beginning on 1
     May.
     When Term 2 is proposed to begin on 28 March.
     Then the proposed calendar is rejected before Term 2's accepted period is replaced, so the
     existing 1 May­28 July period remains unchanged.

       The Aggregate is defined by invariants, not by transaction technology

It is tempting to hear "consistency boundary" and immediately think about a SQL transaction, an ORM
unit of work, or a database lock.
Those mechanisms may later help implement the design, but they are not where the boundary comes
from.
We discovered the boundary before choosing a database because the business said:

Do not accept a Term change that leaves the AcademicYear inconsistent.

That is a domain requirement. Persistence technology comes later.                                                                                    READING CUE

       The smallest useful boundary is usually the better boundary                                                                                   Domain before technology

Why not include Academic Years 2025, 2026, and 2027 in one Aggregate?                                                                                Likewise, an Aggregate is not
Our current rules do not require that. The overlap and chronology rules concern Terms within the same                                                automatically a microservice,
AcademicYear. TermNumber uniqueness is also scoped to one year.                                                                                      a database table, or a folder
Term 2 of 2026 and Term 2 of 2027 may coexist perfectly well.                                                                                        in the source tree. It is first a
So forcing multiple academic years into one consistency boundary would add state without helping us                                                  domain modelling boundary
enforce the rules we have discovered.                                                                                                                around invariants that must
The same reasoning excludes the whole school.                                                                                                        be protected together.

Candidate boundary              Why keep or reject it?

One DateRange                   Too small: cannot decide Term-to-Term rules.
One Term                        Too small: cannot see sibling Terms.
One AcademicYear and its Terms  Fits the rules discovered so far.
Several AcademicYears together  Larger than required by the current invariants.
The entire school               Far larger than the calendar consistency problem.
92                             Step 12. Discovering Aggregates

    Model decision: Choose the smallest useful boundary

    Aggregate design is therefore not a contest to collect as many related objects as possible. The
    goal is to identify the smallest meaningful boundary that can protect the invariants that truly
    must hold together.

       But a boundary drawn on paper does not protect anything

We now know that AcademicYear and its Terms should be treated as one consistency boundary. Yet
our Python objects can still be misused.

A caller might keep a reference to Term 2 and invoke:

PYTHON

    1 term_2.reschedule(

    2   DateRange(

    3      date(2026, 3, 28),

    4      date(2026, 7, 28),

    5   )

    6)

That direct call bypasses the wider validation we just said the Aggregate must perform.
So discovering the Aggregate boundary creates a new implementation question:

       If outside code must not bypass the rules that protect the boundary, through which object
       should changes to the Aggregate be requested?

We have not solved that yet.

The answer will require one Entity inside the Aggregate to become the controlled entry point for opera-
tions that can affect Aggregate consistency.

      Try it: Draw the boundary from rules, not nouns

     Consider the SchoolGrid concepts AcademicYear, Term, DateRange, TermNumber, Learner,
     Teacher, Subject, FeeAccount, and AttendanceRecord. For each concept, ask whether the
     calendar rules discovered in Steps 1­11 require its state to be validated together with the Term
     schedule when a Term is scheduled or rescheduled.
     Then answer these questions:
     1. Why is one Term too small a consistency boundary for the calendar rules?
     2. Why is the whole school too large a boundary for the same rules?
     3. What evidence places AcademicYear and its Terms together?

     4. Why does merely storing Terms in year.terms not protect the boundary?

     5. What could go wrong if outside code keeps a Term reference and changes it directly?

    NEXT QUESTION

    If AcademicYear and its Terms form one Aggregate, which Entity should act as the controlled entry
    point so that outside code cannot bypass the rules by changing a child Term directly?

    Next: Step 13 ­ The Aggregate Root
TRACK 03 / Discover aggregates through pressure
STEP 13

The Aggregate Root

What you will discover

Explain why an Aggregate needs a controlled entry point, identify AcademicYear as the Ag-
gregate Root for the SchoolGrid calendar, distinguish reading child state from independently
mutating child Entities, and explain what Python encapsulation can and cannot guarantee.

Step 12 gave us a boundary but not yet a safe way to use it.

We decided that AcademicYear and its Terms must be treated as one consistency boundary because
several business rules span the whole group. A proposed change to Term 2 must be checked against
the other Terms before the accepted calendar is changed.

But our current object model still lets a caller do exactly what that decision was supposed to prevent.

PYTHON

1 term_2 = year.term(TermNumber(2))

2

3 term_2.reschedule(

4       DateRange(

5          date(2026, 3, 28),

6          date(2026, 7, 28),

7       )

8)

If Term 1 already includes 28 March, the calendar is now invalid. The caller changed the child Entity
without asking the AcademicYear whether the proposed whole was acceptable.

The Aggregate exists conceptually, but its boundary can still be bypassed in code.

Model evolution

INITIAL INTERPRETATION

Know which objects must stay consistent together.

REVISED UNDERSTANDING

Control how outside code is allowed to change those objects.

       The bypass appears in an ordinary use case

The developer shows the administrator two possible ways to implement the same request.

                                     93
                            94                                                                           Step 13. The Aggregate Root

                                DOMAIN WORKSHOP

                                Who should receive the reschedule request?

                                School administrator / Developer

                                DEV Developer
                                Suppose the user asks to reschedule Term 2. I can first fetch Term 2 and tell the Term to
                                change itself.

                                 SA School administrator
                                Will Term 2 check Term 1 and Term 3 before changing?

                                                      DEV Developer
                                                    No. It cannot see them.

                                 SA School administrator
                                Then you are bypassing the calendar check we just agreed was necessary.

                                                      DEV Developer
                                                    The alternative is to ask Academic Year 2026 to reschedule its Term 2.

                                 SA School administrator
                                That sounds closer to the decision I make. I approve the change in the context of the year,
                                not as an isolated edit to a Term.

READING CUE                 The business action is still "reschedule Term 2," but the object that has enough context to coordinate
                            that action is AcademicYear.
Boundary versus entry
point                              AcademicYear already has continuity of its own

The Aggregate boundary      Before naming the next DDD concept, we should confirm that AcademicYear is not merely a container
says what must remain       object.
consistent together. The    Academic Year 2026 may begin with no scheduled Terms, then gain Term 1, then Term 2, and later
Aggregate Root says where   receive valid reschedules. Through all of those state changes the school still speaks about the same
outside requests to change  Academic Year 2026.
that boundary enter.
                                    DOMAIN WORKSHOP

                                 Does changing the schedule create a new Academic Year?

                                  School administrator / Developer

                                DEV Developer
                                If I add Term 2 to Academic Year 2026, have I created a different academic year?

                                 SA School administrator
                                No. It is still Academic Year 2026. We are configuring it.
                                                                                                      95

                      DEV Developer
                    And if we later reschedule Term 2?

 SA School administrator
Still the same academic year. Its calendar has changed, not its identity.

So AcademicYear is itself an Entity: it has continuing identity while its internal schedule evolves.
That makes it eligible to play a special role inside the Aggregate.

       Now the Aggregate Root has earned a name                                                           DDD CONCEPT

Domain-Driven Design designates one Entity in an Aggregate as the Aggregate Root.                         Aggregate Root
For the SchoolGrid calendar Aggregate, that Entity is AcademicYear.
                                                                                                          The Entity that represents the
      DDD discovery: AcademicYear is the Aggregate Root                                                   Aggregate to the outside and
                                                                                                          acts as the controlled entry
     Outside code requests scheduling and rescheduling through AcademicYear. The root uses the            point for operations that may
     information inside the Aggregate to decide whether the proposed change is acceptable before          affect Aggregate consistency.
     allowing a child Term's state to change.

This gives us a more precise model:

Concept       Role in the calendar model
AcademicYear
              Aggregate Root; receives supported calendar changes and coordinates con-
Term          sistency.
              Child Entity; has identity within the AcademicYear and owns local Term be-
TermNumber    haviour.
DateRange     Value Object; represents the permitted numbered position.
              Value Object; represents and validates a period.

Misconception: Aggregate and Aggregate Root are not synonyms

The Aggregate is the entire consistency boundary. The Aggregate Root is one Entity inside that
boundary that represents it to outside code. AcademicYear is the root; AcademicYear together
with its Terms and their values is the Aggregate.

       Move the supported change to the root

The direct child call from the beginning of the step was:

     PYTHON

     1 term_2.reschedule(proposed_period)
The supported operation should instead express the full business context:
                              96                                                    Step 13. The Aggregate Root

                              PYTHON

                                  1 year.reschedule_term(

                                  2   TermNumber(2),

                                  3   proposed_period,

                                  4)

                              That is not merely a longer method call. The receiver has changed from the child Entity to the object
                              that can see the consistency boundary.

                              The first implementation can focus on the overlap rule that exposed the need for this design:

                              PYTHON

                                  1 def reschedule_term(self, number, new_period):

                                  2   term = self._term(number)

                                  3

                                  4   for other in self._terms:

                                  5   if other.number == number:

                                  6   continue

                                  7   if not other.is_scheduled:

                                  8   continue

                                  9   if other.period.overlaps(new_period):

                                  10  raise ValueError("term periods overlap")

                                  11

                                  12  term._reschedule(new_period)

                              The method first inspects the sibling Terms. Only after the proposal clears that check does it ask the
                              selected Term to replace its period.

                              The underscore on _reschedule is deliberate. The state-changing method still belongs to Term be-

                              cause Term owns that local state, but it is no longer advertised as the operation outside callers should
                              invoke directly.

READING CUE                          The root validates before the child mutates

Coordination, not             The ordering of the previous method is the important part:
ownership of every detail
                                   PYTHON
The root does not absorb all
child behaviour. It                1 check_the_proposal()
coordinates changes that           2 term._reschedule(new_period)
need Aggregate-wide
information, while child      not:
objects still own behaviour
that belongs to them.              PYTHON

                                   1 term._reschedule(new_period)
                                   2 check_the_calendar_afterwards()

                              The second sequence temporarily creates an invalid accepted state and then hopes to repair it if vali-
                              dation fails.
                              The first sequence treats the new DateRange as a proposal until the root has enough evidence to accept
                              it.
                                                                                                 97

Example: The root rejects before mutation

Given Term 1 ends on 28 March and Term 2 currently runs from 1 May to 28 July.
When AcademicYear is asked to reschedule Term 2 so that it begins on 28 March.
Then AcademicYear detects the overlap before changing Term 2, rejects the request, and Term
2 remains scheduled from 1 May to 28 July.

The corresponding test now exercises the public Aggregate operation:

PYTHON

1 def test_rejected_reschedule_preserves_term_2():

2       year = configured_2026_calendar()

3       original = year.period_for(TermNumber(2))

4

5       with pytest.raises(ValueError):

6       year.reschedule_term(

7          TermNumber(2),

8          DateRange(

9              date(2026, 3, 28),

10             date(2026, 7, 28),

11         ),

12      )

13

14      assert year.period_for(TermNumber(2)) == original

Notice that the assertion asks the root for the observed period rather than reaching through the root to
mutate or inspect a public child field.

    Reading child information is different from controlling child mutation

An Aggregate Root does not mean outside code must become blind to everything inside the Aggregate.
A caller may need to display Term 2's dates or ask whether Term 3 has been scheduled.
What matters is that observation does not create an unsupported path for changing Aggregate state.
One small root query can expose the information needed by the caller:

PYTHON

1 def period_for(self, number):

2       return self._term(number).period

Because DateRange is immutable, returning that value does not allow the caller to mutate Term 2
indirectly.

We can expose other questions in the same way when a real use case needs them. There is no
requirement to publish every child object merely because it exists.

DOMAIN WORKSHOP

Can the UI still display the Terms?

School administrator / Developer

        DEV Developer
        If AcademicYear is the only entry point, does that mean the screen cannot show Term 2's
        current dates?
                                 98                                                                 Step 13. The Aggregate Root

                                      SA School administrator
                                     Of course it can show them. The restriction is about changing the calendar without the
                                     year checking it.

                                           DEV Developer
                                           So reading information and independently changing a child are different concerns?

                                      SA School administrator
                                     Exactly. Showing the accepted calendar should not create a back door around the
                                     calendar rules.

READING CUE                             A tuple protects a collection less than it first appears

Read is not write                A common Python idea is to keep the internal list private and return a tuple:

The root may expose              PYTHON
information from child objects
without granting an
independent mutation path to
those children. The API
should reflect that difference.

                                     1 @property

                                     2 def terms(self):

                                     3     return tuple(self._terms)

                                 This prevents callers from doing this to the returned collection:

                                      PYTHON

                                      1 year.terms.append(new_term)

                                 because a tuple has no append method.

                                 That is useful, but it does not make the Aggregate immutable.
                                 The tuple still contains references to the same Term objects:

                                      PYTHON

                                      1 term = year.terms[1]
                                      2 term._reschedule(proposed_period)

PYTHON                           A read-only collection is therefore not the same thing as read-only child Entities.
                                 This distinction is easy to miss because two different kinds of mutation are involved:
Reference leak
                                 Mutation                           Does a tuple prevent it?
A mutable object can still be
changed through any              Add or remove an element from the  Yes. The tuple structure is immutable.
reference that reaches it.       returned collection                No. The Term is still the same mutable object.
Wrapping references in an
immutable tuple prevents         Change state inside a mutable
changing the tuple structure,    Term referenced by the tuple
not the referenced objects
themselves.

                                 So returning a tuple may be part of a careful API, but it is not sufficient proof that callers cannot bypass
                                 the Aggregate Root.
99

       Python gives us conventions, not absolute privacy

Languages differ in how strongly they can hide internal members. Python's leading underscore com-
municates that a member is non-public by convention:

    PYTHON

     1 term._reschedule(new_period)

A determined caller can still invoke it.                                                                PYTHON
Double-underscore name mangling can make accidental access harder, but it is not a security boundary
either. Python deliberately relies heavily on convention and API discipline.                            Encapsulation
This does not make the Aggregate Root idea meaningless. It changes what good implementation
discipline looks like:                                                                                  Designing an object's public
                                                                                                        interface so callers use
· outside use cases call public operations on AcademicYear;                                             supported operations while
· child mutation methods are treated as internal implementation details;                                implementation details
· tests exercise the public root operations for Aggregate behaviour;                                    remain internal. In Python,
· modules and naming make unsupported paths visibly exceptional rather than convenient;                 underscores communicate
· code review treats direct child mutation from outside the Aggregate as a boundary violation.          this boundary but do not
                                                                                                        make access physically
                                                                                                        impossible.

The goal is not to make malicious Python code impossible. The goal is to make the correct domain
path obvious and the bypass path clearly unsupported.

      Misconception: Private syntax is not the Aggregate Root

     Adding underscores does not create a DDD boundary by itself. AcademicYear is the Aggregate
     Root because the domain requires calendar-wide consistency and the model routes supported
     changes through the Entity that can protect it. The underscore merely helps the Python imple-
     mentation communicate that decision.

       The root should not become a god object

Once AcademicYear becomes the entry point, another bad design becomes tempting: move every
method from every child into AcademicYear.
That would solve the wrong problem.
Term still knows whether it is currently scheduled. DateRange still knows whether two periods overlap.
TermNumber still protects the values 1, 2, and 3. The root coordinates these concepts when a decision
requires their combined information.
For example, the root can ask a DateRange factual question:

     PYTHON

     1 other.period.overlaps(new_period)

and then use the answer to enforce the AcademicYear policy.
It does not need to reimplement DateRange arithmetic inside AcademicYear.
100                                                     Step 13. The Aggregate Root

     KEY IDEA An Aggregate Root coordinates consistency; it does not replace the behaviour of every
     object inside the Aggregate. Good Aggregate design preserves responsibility at the smallest con-
     cept that has enough information to own it.

        The root also protects how child Entities are created

The same boundary applies when a new Term is scheduled.
A caller should not create a Term and append it directly to some public list:

PYTHON

     1 year.terms.append(

     2   Term(TermNumber(2))

     3)

Instead, the supported action enters through the root:

PYTHON

     1 year.schedule_term(

     2   TermNumber(2),

     3   DateRange(

     4       date(2026, 5, 1),

     5       date(2026, 7, 28),

     6   ),

     7)

The root can then decide whether that numbered Term may be added to the current AcademicYear
before changing the internal collection.

We are deliberately not implementing every scheduling rule in this step. The important architectural
change is that there is now one supported place where those rules can be enforced consistently.

     Model decision: External changes enter through AcademicYear

     AcademicYear is the public entry point for scheduling and rescheduling Terms in its calendar
     Aggregate. Term continues to own local state behaviour, but direct child mutation is treated
     as internal to the Aggregate. The root validates the proposal using Aggregate context before
     allowing accepted child state to change.

       What the root has solved--and what it has not

We now have a credible answer to the bypass problem.

Outside code no longer needs to know how Term 2 mutates itself. It asks Academic Year 2026 to
perform the business operation. AcademicYear can inspect its Terms, reject an invalid proposal before
mutation, and then delegate the local state change to the selected child.

But a new question immediately follows.

Our example checked overlap. The school has already discovered several other calendar rules: dupli-
cate TermNumbers, chronological ordering, the current calendar-year containment policy, progressive
scheduling, and preservation of accepted state after rejection.

If AcademicYear is now responsible for protecting the Aggregate boundary, we must state precisely
                                                                                                                                               101

which conditions must always remain true after a supported operation completes.
That is the next modelling task.

      Try it: Find the real entry point

     Consider each line below and decide whether it should be part of the supported outside API of
     the calendar Aggregate. Explain what rule could be bypassed if the wrong object receives the
     change.

    1. year.reschedule_term(TermNumber(2), proposed)
    2. term_2._reschedule(proposed) from application code
    3. year.period_for(TermNumber(2))
    4. returning tuple(year._terms) to a caller

     5. appending a newly constructed Term directly to the internal collection
     Then explain why a tuple can protect collection structure without protecting the mutable state of
     every object referenced inside it.

        NEXT QUESTION

      Now that every supported calendar change enters through AcademicYear, exactly which conditions
      must the root guarantee are true after each accepted operation--and which incomplete states are
      still valid while the year is being configured?
      Next: Step 14 ­ Aggregate Invariants
TRACK 03 / Discover aggregates through pressure
STEP 14

Aggregate Invariants

      What you will discover

     State the SchoolGrid calendar invariants precisely, distinguish Aggregate consistency from life-
     cycle completeness, and use examples to show how AcademicYear can remain valid while it is
     being configured progressively.

Step 13 gave AcademicYear a clear responsibility: every supported scheduling change enters through
the Aggregate Root so that calendar-wide rules cannot be bypassed by changing a child Term directly.
That immediately creates a harder question.

         What, exactly, must AcademicYear guarantee before it accepts a change?

We already have the raw material. Steps 1 and 2 discovered rules about permitted TermNumbers,
duplicate Terms, calendar-year containment, chronology, shared days, and rejected changes. The
Aggregate work in Steps 11­13 showed that several of those rules need the whole AcademicYear
context.
Now we must turn those agreements into precise conditions that define an acceptable Aggregate state.

      Model evolution
      INITIAL INTERPRETATION

     Route every supported change through the Aggregate Root.

      REVISED UNDERSTANDING

     State the conditions the root must preserve after every accepted change.

   Start with a draft year, not an imaginary finished year

The administrator begins configuring Academic Year 2026 before every Term date is known.
She may first enter only Term 2:

PYTHON

1 year = AcademicYear(2026)

2

3 year.schedule_term(

4       TermNumber(2),

5       DateRange(

6           date(2026, 5, 1),

7           date(2026, 7, 28),

8       ),

9)

                                102
                                                                                                           103

At first glance this can look suspicious. There is no Term 1 yet. There is no Term 3 either.
But BR-2.4 already told us that SchoolGrid allows the year to be configured progressively.

        DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     Is Term 2 allowed to exist before Term 1 is entered?

      School administrator / Developer

                      DEV Developer
                    If you enter Term 2 first, have we violated the rule that Term 1 comes before Term 2?

 SA School administrator
No. I have only entered the information in a different order. I have not said that Term 2
occurs before Term 1 in the calendar.

                      DEV Developer
                    So data-entry order and calendar order are different things?

 SA School administrator
Exactly. When both Terms have dates, their dates must follow their numbers. But I do not
need to type them into SchoolGrid in numerical order.

That distinction determines how strict the Aggregate is allowed to be.                                          READING CUE
An AcademicYear containing only Term 2 can therefore be an acceptable intermediate state.
                                                                                                                Configuration order versus
       An invariant is not the same thing as completeness                                                       calendar order
                                                                                                                Term 2 may be entered
We first met the idea of an invariant with DateRange in Step 7. There the condition was local: a closing        before Term 1. The invariant
date must never precede its opening date.                                                                       constrains the dates of Terms
At Aggregate level, an invariant is a condition that must remain true for the accepted Aggregate state          that are present; it does not
after every supported operation completes.                                                                      prescribe the order in which
That wording matters because a different kind of requirement may apply only at a particular lifecycle           administrators must enter
stage.                                                                                                          them.
Imagine the school later says:
                                                                                                                DDD CONCEPT
         Do not publish the academic calendar until all three Terms have been scheduled.
                                                                                                                Aggregate invariant
That could be a perfectly reasonable publication rule. But it would not mean that an AcademicYear               A business condition that
containing only Term 1 is internally inconsistent while the administrator is still preparing it.                must hold for every accepted
                                                                                                                state of an Aggregate,
                                                                                                                including valid intermediate
                                                                                                                states while the Aggregate
                                                                                                                evolves.

CONTRAST

Aggregate invariant                               Lifecycle completeness rule

Must hold after every accepted Aggregate change.  Applies when performing a particular transition
Example: two scheduled Terms in the same year     such as publishing. A draft may remain incomplete
may not contradict their number order.            before that transition.

We have not yet discovered a SchoolGrid publication requirement, so we will not invent one. The
example simply shows why incomplete and invalid must not be treated as synonyms.
                                104                                                        Step 14. Aggregate Invariants

                                     Misconception: A valid Aggregate need not be a finished Aggregate

                                     Progressive configuration means a draft AcademicYear can be valid with only some Terms
                                     scheduled. Requiring all three Terms after every operation would contradict the business evi-
                                     dence from Step 2.

                                        Invariant 1: a TermNumber is unique within the year

                                The first Aggregate rule is already familiar from BR-2.3.
                                If Academic Year 2026 already contains Term 2, another request must not create a second Term 2.
                                A test makes both rejection and state preservation visible:

                                PYTHON

                                     1 def test_year_rejects_a_second_term_2():

                                     2  year = AcademicYear(2026)

                                     3  original = DateRange(

                                     4     date(2026, 5, 1),

                                     5     date(2026, 7, 28),

                                     6  )

                                     7  year.schedule_term(TermNumber(2), original)

                                     8

                                     9  with pytest.raises(ValueError):

                                10         year.schedule_term(

                                11            TermNumber(2),

                                12            DateRange(

                                13                date(2026, 5, 10),

                                14                date(2026, 7, 28),

                                15            ),

                                16         )

                                17

                                18      assert year.period_for(TermNumber(2)) == original

                                The proposed DateRange is valid. TermNumber 2 is also valid. The problem is the combination: the
                                Aggregate would contain two child Entities claiming the same identity within the year.

                                The root can detect that before creating the new child:

                                PYTHON

                                     1 def _ensure_number_available(self, number):

                                     2  if any(term.number == number for term in self._terms):

                                     3     raise ValueError("term number already exists")

READING CUE                     This invariant does not say every permitted number must already exist. It says that a number which
                                does identify a Term in this year may identify at most one such Term.
Scoped uniqueness
                                       Invariant 2: scheduled dates remain inside the named year
TermNumber 2 may exist
many times as a Value           The teaching policy from BR-2.5 says that Term dates for Academic Year 2026 must remain in calendar
Object. What must be unique     year 2026.
is the Term identified by that  A DateRange such as this is internally valid:
number inside one
AcademicYear.
                                                                                      105

PYTHON

1 proposed = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 9, 1),

3       date(2027, 1, 15),

4)

Its closing date comes after its opening date. DateRange has no reason to reject it.

AcademicYear does:

PYTHON

1 def test_year_rejects_term_crossing_into_2027():

2       year = AcademicYear(2026)

3

4       with pytest.raises(ValueError):

5       year.schedule_term(

6                   TermNumber(3),

7                   DateRange(

8                       date(2026, 9, 1),

9                       date(2027, 1, 15),

10                  ),

11      )

The root has the piece of information DateRange lacks: which AcademicYear the period is being pro-
posed for.

The corresponding check is small:

PYTHON

1 def _ensure_within_year(self, period):

2       if period.opening_date.year != self._year:

3       raise ValueError("opening date is outside academic year")

4       if period.closing_date.year != self._year:

5       raise ValueError("closing date is outside academic year")

This is a SchoolGrid teaching policy, not a universal truth about academic years. A different school  MODELLING
model could legitimately allow a year to cross a calendar-year boundary.
                                                                                                      Contextual validity
       Invariant 3: Term numbers determine chronological order
                                                                                                      A value may be valid by itself
Now return to BR-2.6.                                                                                 yet unacceptable in a
Suppose Term 2 is already scheduled from 1 May to 28 July. Later the administrator enters Term 1 as   particular context. The
1 September to 28 November:                                                                           DateRange is chronological;
                                                                                                      AcademicYear 2026 still
                                                                                                      rejects it because the closing
                                                                                                      date belongs to 2027.

PYTHON

1 term_2_period = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 5, 1),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 proposed_term_1 = DateRange(

7       date(2026, 9, 1),

8       date(2026, 11, 28),

9)
                              106                                                      Step 14. Aggregate Invariants

                              The two ranges do not overlap. Yet the calendar is still wrong: Term 1 would occur after Term 2.

                                      DOMAIN WORKSHOP

                                   Is non-overlap enough?

                                    School administrator / Developer

                                      DEV Developer
                                      Term 2 ends in July and the proposed Term 1 begins in September. They do not share a
                                      day. Can I accept both?

                               SA School administrator
                              No. Term 1 must occur before Term 2.

                                                    DEV Developer
                                                  So "no overlap" is necessary, but it does not capture the whole rule?

                               SA School administrator
                              Correct. The numbers describe the order of the Terms, not merely labels attached to
                              unrelated periods.

                              That gives us the stronger pairwise condition:

                                      For any two scheduled Terms in one AcademicYear, the lower-numbered Term must close
                                      strictly before the higher-numbered Term opens.

READING CUE                   Because the comparison is strict, the condition also prevents the two Terms from sharing a boundary
                              day.
One condition does two
jobs                          A helper can express the rule relative to a proposed period:

If every lower-numbered       PYTHON
scheduled Term closes
strictly before every              1 def _ensure_fits_schedule(self, number, period):
higher-numbered scheduled
Term opens, the calendar           2  for other in self._terms:
has both the required number
order and no overlap               3  if not other.is_scheduled or other.number == number:
between Terms.
                                   4  continue

                                   5

                                   6  if number < other.number:

                                   7  if period.closing_date >= other.period.opening_date:

                                   8         raise ValueError("term order conflict")

                                   9  else:

                              10      if other.period.closing_date >= period.opening_date:

                              11             raise ValueError("term order conflict")

                              The helper does not care which Term was entered first. It compares the numbered positions and the
                              calendar dates that are currently known.

                                     The shared-day boundary still matters

                              The strict comparison explains the boundary example that has followed the book since Step 1.
                              Term 1 ends on 28 March:
                                                                             107

PYTHON

1 term_1 = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 1, 1),

3       date(2026, 3, 28),

4)

A Term 2 opening on the same day is rejected:

PYTHON

1 shared_day = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 3, 28),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 assert term_1.closing_date >= shared_day.opening_date

A Term 2 opening the following day clears that particular rule:

PYTHON

1 next_day = DateRange(

2       date(2026, 3, 29),

3       date(2026, 7, 28),

4)

5

6 assert term_1.closing_date < next_day.opening_date

This is not merely a DateRange fact. The Aggregate interprets the relationship in light of TermNumber
order.

       Gaps are allowed because no rule forbids them

The current 2026 example actually contains a gap between Term 1 and Term 2:

        Term                Period

        Term 1              1 January­28 March
        Term 2              1 May­28 July

There are unscheduled days between 29 March and 30 April. Nothing in the rules says the Terms must
touch each other with no gap.
A developer could easily over-generalise the strict ordering rule into a false adjacency rule. The following
expression would be too strict for the rules we actually discovered:

     PYTHON

     1 next_term.opening_date == previous_term.closing_date + one_day

SchoolGrid has no evidence for that requirement.
                               108                                                                            Step 14. Aggregate Invariants

                                    DOMAIN WORKSHOP

                                    Must every Term start the day after the previous one closes?

                                    School administrator / Developer

                                                     DEV Developer
                                                   To keep the calendar orderly, should Term 2 always open immediately after Term 1
                                                   closes?

                                SA School administrator
                               No. We can have holidays and other gaps between Terms.

                                            DEV Developer
                                            So the rule is "later," not "the very next day"?

                                SA School administrator
                               Exactly. Do not turn an example into a tighter rule than the school gave you.

DISCOVERY TOOL                 The invariant therefore allows gaps.

Over-constraint                        Partial schedules are also allowed

A model is over-constrained    Now consider a year with only Term 2 scheduled:
when it rejects states the
business actually permits.     PYTHON
Adding unsupported
restrictions is as much a
modelling error as failing to
enforce a real rule.

                                    1 year = AcademicYear(2026)

                                    2 year.schedule_term(

                                    3   TermNumber(2),

                                    4   DateRange(

                                    5       date(2026, 5, 1),

                                    6       date(2026, 7, 28),

                                    7   ),

                                    8)

                               There is no Term 1 period to compare with and no Term 3 period to compare with. The pairwise
                               chronology invariant has nothing to reject.

                               Later, Term 1 can be proposed. At that moment the Aggregate finally has enough information to com-
                               pare the two:

                               PYTHON

                                    1 year.schedule_term(

                                    2   TermNumber(1),

                                    3   DateRange(

                                    4       date(2026, 1, 1),

                                    5       date(2026, 3, 28),

                                    6   ),

                                    7)

                               The year remains valid because the newly known pair satisfies the rule.
                               A different Term 1 proposal would fail at the moment it creates contradictory information:
                                                                                                 109

PYTHON

1 DateRange(

2       date(2026, 9, 1),

3       date(2026, 11, 28),

4)

This is a subtle but important model: incomplete information is permitted, but contradictory information  READING CUE
is not.
                                                                                                          Validate what is known
   Bring the invariant checks into the root operation
                                                                                                          Progressive configuration
We can now see the structure of schedule_term more clearly.                                               does not suspend invariants.
                                                                                                          The root enforces every
Before mutating the Aggregate, the root checks the rules for which the proposal provides enough infor-    invariant that can be
mation:                                                                                                   evaluated from the state
                                                                                                          currently known, without
                                                                                                          inventing missing
                                                                                                          information.

PYTHON

1 def schedule_term(self, number, period):

2       self._ensure_number_available(number)

3       self._ensure_within_year(period)

4       self._ensure_fits_schedule(number, period)

5

6       term = Term(number)

7       term._schedule(period)

8       self._terms.append(term)

The order is deliberate. All Aggregate-level rejection happens before the new Term becomes accepted
state.

Rescheduling follows the same shape:

PYTHON

1 def reschedule_term(self, number, new_period):

2       term = self._term(number)

3       self._ensure_within_year(new_period)

4       self._ensure_fits_schedule(number, new_period)

5

6       term._reschedule(new_period)

The difference between scheduling and rescheduling remains meaningful, but the same Aggregate
invariants protect the proposed period in both operations.

Model decision: Every accepted root operation preserves the calendar invariants

AcademicYear rejects duplicate Term identities, dates outside the configured calendar year, and
Term periods that contradict TermNumber chronology. It allows gaps and partially configured
years because no discovered invariant forbids them. The root validates proposed Aggregate
state before applying the mutation.

       A rule-to-example matrix keeps the model honest

At this point the Aggregate behaviour is easier to audit if each rule is paired with an example near its
boundary.
110                                                                   Step 14. Aggregate Invariants

Example                       What it probes                          Outcome
                                                                      Reject
Add another Term 2            Scoped Term identity must be unique     Reject
Term 3 closes 15 Jan 2027     Scheduled dates remain in 2026          Reject
Term 1 Sep­Nov, Term 2 May­   Number chronology, despite no overlap
Jul                                                                   Reject
Term 1 closes 28 Mar, Term 2  Inclusive shared day
opens 28 Mar                                                          Clears this rule
Term 1 closes 28 Mar, Term 2  Strict ordering boundary
opens 29 Mar                                                          Acceptable
Term 1 closes 28 Mar, Term 2  Gaps are permitted
opens 1 May                                                           Acceptable
Only Term 2 is scheduled      Progressive configuration               Acceptable un-
Term 2 entered before Term 1  Data-entry order is not calendar order  til contradictory
                                                                      dates appear

The last two rows are especially important. Without them, a test suite could accidentally encode the
false requirement that AcademicYear must always contain a complete three-Term calendar.

        One failed rule must not damage another accepted state

Every invariant check also inherits the preservation rule from BR-2.7.
Suppose Term 2 is currently accepted as 1 May­28 July. A reschedule to 28 March­28 July violates
chronology with Term 1.
The root must reject the proposal and leave this observation unchanged:

PYTHON

     1 assert year.period_for(TermNumber(2)) == DateRange(

     2   date(2026, 5, 1),

     3   date(2026, 7, 28),

     4)

The same applies to a duplicate TermNumber or a cross-year proposal. Rejection is not merely an
exception being raised; it is the guarantee that the previously accepted Aggregate state survives the
failed operation.

     DOMAIN WORKSHOP

     What should remain after a rejected change?

     School administrator / Developer

                      DEV Developer
                    If a proposed Term 2 date breaks one of these rules, is it enough that SchoolGrid displays
                    an error?

 SA School administrator
No. When I return to the calendar, I expect the last accepted dates still to be there.

         DEV Developer
         So rejection has an observable state guarantee, not just an error message?
                                                                                                       111

 SA School administrator
Exactly. A failed request must not leave half of its change behind.

       Do not confuse an invariant with every business rule in the system                                   READING CUE

Not every rule involving an AcademicYear must become an Aggregate invariant.                                Failure has a postcondition
Suppose a future requirement says:                                                                          too

         The headteacher must approve the calendar before parents receive it.                               For a rejected Aggregate
                                                                                                            operation, an important
                                                                                                            postcondition is that the
                                                                                                            previously accepted state
                                                                                                            remains intact.

That is a business rule, but it does not automatically mean that every in-memory AcademicYear without
headteacher approval is invalid. It may instead govern a specific use case such as publication.

Likewise, a rule that only administrators may reschedule Terms concerns authorization. It may be
enforced before the domain operation is invoked rather than encoded as structural consistency of the
Aggregate itself.

CONTRAST

Aggregate invariant                                Other business rule
Defines which Aggregate states are acceptable af-
ter supported domain changes.                      May govern who may request an operation, when
                                                   a lifecycle transition is allowed, or what happens
                                                   outside the Aggregate.

The Aggregate should protect the consistency rules that define its valid state, not become a dumping
ground for every policy that mentions AcademicYear.

       The invariant is about the accepted whole

We can now summarise the current SchoolGrid calendar invariant more precisely.
For Academic Year 2026, every accepted state must satisfy all of the following for the Terms that cur-
rently exist:

· each Term has a permitted TermNumber, already guaranteed by TermNumber;
· no two Terms in the year have the same TermNumber;
· every scheduled DateRange belongs to calendar year 2026 under the current teaching policy;
· for any two scheduled Terms, the lower-numbered Term closes strictly before the higher-numbered

  Term opens;
· gaps are allowed;
· Terms may be missing while the year is being configured progressively.

This formulation does not say "exactly three Terms must always exist." It does not say Terms must be
entered in numerical order. It does not say one Term must begin immediately after the previous one
closes.
Those omissions are intentional. A precise model protects the rules that the business actually gave us
and leaves unsupported restrictions out.
112  Step 14. Aggregate Invariants

     KEY IDEA An Aggregate invariant should be strong enough to exclude every state the business has
     declared inconsistent, but no stronger. Progressive configuration means SchoolGrid must preserve
     consistency without confusing incompleteness with invalidity.

       The next problem is not another rule

At this point AcademicYear has a coherent set of conditions to protect, and the root can validate pro-
posed changes before mutating its child Terms.

In memory, that gives us an important guarantee: a rejected operation need not leave a partially
changed Aggregate.

But SchoolGrid will eventually save AcademicYear somewhere durable. That raises a new class of
questions.

What if the program changes the Aggregate correctly in memory but the database save fails halfway
through? What if two administrators both load Academic Year 2026, make different individually valid
changes, and save them without noticing that one was based on stale state?

Those questions are related to the consistency boundary, but they are not solved merely by writing
another invariant.

      Try it: Invariant or lifecycle rule?

     For each statement, decide whether it describes an invariant of every accepted draft Academi-
     cYear, a possible lifecycle/use-case rule, or a rule we have no evidence for. Explain the distinc-
     tion.
     1. No two Terms in one AcademicYear share the same TermNumber.
     2. Every scheduled Term in Academic Year 2026 has dates in 2026.
     3. All three Terms must be scheduled before any draft can be saved.
     4. All three Terms must be scheduled before a future "publish calendar" operation succeeds.
     5. Term 2 may be entered before Term 1.
     6. Two scheduled Terms may not contradict their numeric order.
     7. Term 2 must start exactly one day after Term 1 closes.
     Then explain why a requirement can be important to the business without necessarily being an
     Aggregate invariant.

     NEXT QUESTION

     If the Aggregate's invariants must remain true through every accepted change, what does that imply
     about applying and saving a change as one atomic unit--and what additional problems appear when
     persistence failures or concurrent editors enter the picture?

     Next: Step 15 ­ Transactional Consistency and Why Aggregates Matter
TRACK 03 / Discover aggregates through pressure
STEP 15

Transactional Consistency and Why
Aggregates Matter

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                         READING CUE

A rejected reschedule must not partly change the calendar. Later, two administrators may also    What you will discover
try to save different changes at the same time.                                                  Distinguish an atomic domain
                                                                                                 operation, a database
Ideas to develop                                                                                 transaction, and
                                                                                                 concurrent-update protection.
First reason about validating a proposed state before mutation. Then distinguish this in-memory
guarantee from durable commit and concurrency control. Introduce a version check as one
possible later persistence mechanism; an aggregate alone does not prevent a stale save from
overwriting another user's work.

Example: The example to build on

Given Term 2 has an accepted period.
When a reschedule would overlap Term 1.
Then the operation is rejected and the original schedule is preserved.

Testing checkpoint

Start with a state-preservation domain test. Reserve commit failure and competing-save tests
for a real persistence boundary.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Can two individually valid changes produce an invalid combined schedule when saved without
concurrency protection?

113
                               TRACK 04 / Complete the domain model
                               STEP 16

                               Domain Services: Behaviour That Does
                               Not Naturally Belong to One Object

READING CUE                    The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover         As an optional extension, two schools want to find shared teaching dates for an inter-school
Identify a genuine domain      activity by comparing their independently managed calendars.
operation without inventing a
service for every rule.        Ideas to develop

                               Explore whether the comparison belongs to either calendar or to a stateless domain operation
                               that accepts both. Keep repository loading outside that calculation. Compare a function, a
                               policy object, and a service class. The core one-school scheduling model does not require a
                               domain service simply to complete a pattern checklist.

                               Example: The example to build on

                               Given two valid calendars have been supplied for comparison.
                               When the shared-teaching-date calculation is requested.
                               Then it returns dates satisfying both calendars without changing either one.

                               Testing checkpoint

                               Test common dates, no common dates, and unchanged input calendars using ordinary domain
                               objects.

                               Try it: Explain before implementing

                               What would distinguish this domain calculation from the application work of loading the calen-
                               dars?

                               114
TRACK 04 / Complete the domain model
STEP 17

Factories: Creating Valid Domain
Objects

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                             READING CUE

Creating a term is not merely allocating an object: its number must be available and its dates       What you will discover
acceptable within the year.                                                                          Distinguish constructors,
                                                                                                     factory methods, and
Ideas to develop                                                                                     dedicated factories, and
                                                                                                     justify their use.
Compare simple DateRange construction with creating a Term through its AcademicYear. Intro-
duce factory behaviour as coordinated creation, not necessarily a separate class. Consider a
future three-term calendar template only as an optional construction problem. Keep reconstitu-
tion from storage distinct from a new business creation event.

Example: The example to build on

Given Term 1 already exists in the year.
When creation of another Term 1 is requested.
Then creation is refused rather than returning an invalid new child for callers to repair.

Testing checkpoint

Test valid creation and rejection before insertion; check that failed construction leaves the owner
unchanged.

Try it: Explain before implementing

When would a separate factory add clarity beyond a constructor or root operation?

115
                           TRACK 04 / Complete the domain model
                           STEP 18

                           Domain Events: Recording That
                           Something Important Happened

READING CUE                The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover     After a successful reschedule, the school may want another part of the system to react. This is
Distinguish commands from  an optional extension of the calendar story.
past business facts and
recording from reliable    Ideas to develop
external delivery.
                           Explore AcademicYearCreated, TermScheduled, and TermRescheduled as past-tense facts
                           with sufficient identity and relevant data. Keep event recording inside the successful business
                           operation separate from notification delivery. Introduce transactional outbox and idempotency
                           only as later reliability concerns, not prerequisites for understanding an event.

                           Example: The example to build on

                           Given a valid reschedule changes Term 2's period.
                           When the operation completes successfully.
                           Then a TermRescheduled fact can be recorded; a rejected change must not announce success.

                           Testing checkpoint

                           Test event meaning on success and absence on rejection. Defer delivery, retry, and transaction
                           tests to integration.

                           Try it: Explain before implementing

                           Why is publishing an external message before the database commit risky?

                           116
TRACK 04 / Complete the domain model
STEP 19

Repositories: Thinking in Aggregates,
Not Tables

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                          READING CUE

An administrator returns tomorrow to change the 2026 calendar. The application must recover       What you will discover
the same academic year and its scheduled terms.                                                   Explain retrieval and
                                                                                                  persistence in terms of
Ideas to develop                                                                                  aggregate roots and
                                                                                                  business identity.
Introduce a collection-like repository contract for AcademicYear, not separate independent write
repositories for its child Terms. Describe getting an aggregate and recording its accepted state
without selecting a database technology. Make clear that the repository abstraction and its
storage implementation are different concerns.

Example: The example to build on

Given the 2026 academic year has been persisted.
When the use case retrieves that year.
Then it receives the domain state needed to evaluate a later scheduling request.

Testing checkpoint

Plan a reusable retrieval-and-save contract, first supported by an in-memory fake and later
checked against actual storage.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Why might a repository return AcademicYear rather than a row for Term 2 alone?

117
                           TRACK 04 / Complete the domain model
                           STEP 20

                           What Repositories Should and Should
                           Not Do

READING CUE                The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover     A calendar screen needs only term numbers and dates. Must it load every aggregate and use
Distinguish aggregate      the same path as a rescheduling command?
repositories, data-access
objects, DTOs, and read    Ideas to develop
projections.
                           Compare an aggregate-oriented write repository with a storage-oriented DAO and a read query
                           that projects data. Explain why children do not automatically need repositories and why a DTO
                           result is not an aggregate. Keep query design flexible; do not turn a useful repository convention
                           into a universal rule for every read.

                           Example: The example to build on

                           Given the user only wants a calendar summary.
                           When a read query selects term numbers and dates.
                           Then it can return a projection without pretending that the projection can enforce scheduling
                           rules.

                           Testing checkpoint

                           Separate repository behaviour tests from projection-shape tests and mutation-rule tests.

                           Try it: Explain before implementing

                           What would be lost by replacing the command-side aggregate with a writable DTO?

                           118
TRACK 05 / Move from the domain to use cases
STEP 21

A User Wants to Schedule a Term: What
Actually Happens?

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                          READING CUE

The administrator requests Term 2 for 1 May through 28 July 2026. A domain operation is           What you will discover
necessary, but it is not the entire user interaction.                                             Trace one use case and
                                                                                                  distinguish user intention,
Ideas to develop                                                                                  coordination, domain
                                                                                                  decision, and persistence.
Sketch request handling: interpret input, locate the academic year, ask it to schedule the term,
persist an accepted change, and report the outcome. Identify missing-year, rejected-rule, and
save-failure paths. Avoid teaching an HTTP endpoint as though it were the business operation
itself.

Example: The example to build on

Given the 2026 academic year exists with a compatible Term 1.
When the user requests the proposed Term 2 period.
Then the use case reports success only after the accepted schedule has been saved.

Testing checkpoint

Write an application-level acceptance example before introducing its service implementation.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Which steps decide business acceptability, and which merely arrange for that decision to occur?

119
                             TRACK 05 / Move from the domain to use cases
                             STEP 22

                             Application Services: Coordinating a
                             Use Case

READING CUE                  The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover       The same scheduling workflow should work whether the user starts it from a form or a command-
Separate orchestration from  line interface.
domain policy and from
infrastructure               Ideas to develop
implementation.
                             Give an application service responsibility for coordinating loading, domain operations, persis-
                             tence, and result production. Keep the non-overlap decision in the domain. Discuss transaction
                             coordination and access checks at the appropriate use-case boundary without claiming every
                             form of authorisation is non-domain logic.

                             Example: The example to build on

                             Given the requested academic year cannot be found.
                             When the scheduling use case runs.
                             Then it returns an appropriate missing-year outcome without attempting to schedule or save a
                             term.

                             Testing checkpoint

                             Use a repository fake to test success, missing state, domain rejection, and persistence failure
                             separately.

                             Try it: Explain before implementing

                             How would duplicated overlap checks in multiple application services weaken the design?

                             120
TRACK 05 / Move from the domain to use cases
STEP 23

Commands and Use-Case Input Models

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                      READING CUE

Several interfaces must convey the same intention: schedule Term 2 in the 2026 academic year  What you will discover
for a proposed period.                                                                        Explain command intent and
                                                                                              distinguish request shape
Ideas to develop                                                                              from domain validity.

Introduce ScheduleTermCommand as a use-case input contract. Discuss required fields,
parsed dates, and permitted values at their respective boundaries. A command asks for a
change; its existence does not prove that the change is allowed. Do not require a command
bus, mediator, or event-sourced system.

Example: The example to build on

Given a well-formed command contains dates that overlap Term 1.
When the use case processes it.
Then the domain still rejects the requested change despite the command's valid shape.

Testing checkpoint

Test malformed transport input separately from a well-formed but unacceptable scheduling re-
quest.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Why is TermRescheduled a different kind of message from RescheduleTerm?

121
                              TRACK 05 / Move from the domain to use cases
                              STEP 24

                              DTOs: Moving Data Across Boundaries

READING CUE                   The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover        The interface needs a predictable response containing the year, term number, and displayed
Recognise DTOs and            dates, not access to a mutable domain object.
projections and explain why
transport data should not be  Ideas to develop
mistaken for a domain model.
                              Explain a DTO's data-transfer purpose, mapping, and serialisation. A projection into an agreed
                              data structure can be a DTO; selecting attributes alone does not make it an entity. Contrast
                              boundary data with domain behaviour and consider how clients evolve without exposing internal
                              object structure.

                              Example: The example to build on

                              Given a calendar summary has been produced.
                              When a client changes its local copy of the response.
                              Then the authoritative calendar does not change merely because response data was edited.

                              Testing checkpoint

                              Check response fields and mapping independently from domain scheduling tests.

                              Try it: Explain before implementing

                              Why should a client not be able to bypass business rules by sending an edited response object
                              back?

                              122
TRACK 05 / Move from the domain to use cases
STEP 25

Queries and Read Models

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                        READING CUE

The administrator opens a dashboard listing the dates of every scheduled term. No scheduling    What you will discover
decision is being requested.                                                                    Choose an appropriate read
                                                                                                path and explain when
Ideas to develop                                                                                aggregate reconstruction is
                                                                                                unnecessary.
Develop a calendar-summary read model and projection. Separate reads from changes concep-
tually without demanding separate databases or full CQRS infrastructure. Discuss consistency
expectations, access filtering, and pagination only where the actual screen needs them. A read
projection cannot authorise a later change by itself.

Example: The example to build on

Given a year contains two scheduled terms.
When the summary is requested.
Then the read result shows those two terms accurately without inventing a missing third term.

Testing checkpoint

Test ordering, empty years, partial schedules, and the declared consistency expectation of the
chosen read path.

Try it: Explain before implementing

When is loading an aggregate the simplest read implementation, and when is a projection
clearer?

123
                             TRACK 06 / Introduce Clean Architecture naturally
                             STEP 26

                             The Architecture Problem: Our Domain
                             Now Needs a Database and UI

READING CUE                  The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover       The calendar rules now need to be reached through a user interface and stored between ses-
Identify coupling pressures  sions. Technical choices start pulling on the model.
before introducing
architecture layers.         Ideas to develop

                             Compare putting SQL, HTTP parsing, and calendar decisions into one operation with sepa-
                             rating their responsibilities. Ask what should remain stable when an interface or persistence
                             mechanism changes. Keep architecture proportional to the project: the problem is unwanted
                             dependency, not an insufficient number of folders.

                             Example: The example to build on

                             Given the school replaces its command-line interface with a web form.
                             When the same scheduling request is submitted.
                             Then its business acceptability should remain the same.

                             Testing checkpoint

                             Retain the existing domain tests while experimenting with different adapters.

                             Try it: Explain before implementing

                             Which changes should require revisiting the school's rules, and which should not?

                             124
TRACK 06 / Introduce Clean Architecture naturally
STEP 27

Clean Architecture: Protect the
Business Rules

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                           READING CUE

A web-framework upgrade should not change whether two school terms may share a day.                What you will discover

Ideas to develop                                                                                   Explain business-policy
                                                                                                   independence and
Introduce the dependency rule and a practical domain, application, infrastructure, and presen-     distinguish architectural
tation arrangement. Distinguish source-code dependency from runtime collaboration. Present         intent from a fixed folder
the four layers as this book's mapping, not the only valid number or naming of Clean Architecture  recipe.
boundaries.

Example: The example to build on

Given the database implementation changes.
When the same calendar examples are evaluated.
Then the meaning of valid and invalid schedules remains independent of that technology
change.

Testing checkpoint

Use unchanged domain tests as evidence of behavioural stability; separately inspect depen-
dencies.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Can a project have four correctly named folders while still violating the intended dependency
direction?

125
                                  TRACK 06 / Introduce Clean Architecture naturally
                                  STEP 28

                                  The Domain Layer

READING CUE                       The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover            The team sorts its calendar concepts by what they mean rather than by which screen uses
Locate domain                     them.
responsibilities and justify the
placement of inward-facing        Ideas to develop
contracts.
                                  Place value objects, entities, aggregate behaviour, and genuinely needed domain services,
                                  events, and factories with domain policy. For this teaching design, locate the aggregate repos-
                                  itory contract inward with the domain; recognise that other architectures put such a port in the
                                  application layer. Keep database implementations outside.

                                  Example: The example to build on

                                  Given a new UI framework is introduced.
                                  When the domain package is imported and its examples are exercised.
                                  Then the domain does not require that framework to understand a calendar.

                                  Testing checkpoint

                                  Check both business behaviour and the absence of outward framework imports.

                                  Try it: Explain before implementing

                                  Does every domain need all of the tactical patterns listed in a textbook?

                                                                                     126
TRACK 06 / Introduce Clean Architecture naturally
STEP 29

The Application Layer

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                    READING CUE

Scheduling a term requires a sequence of work, but the calendar should not know which con-  What you will discover
troller requested it.
                                                                                            Locate use cases,
Ideas to develop                                                                            input/output contracts,
                                                                                            coordination, and
Collect application services, commands, use-case DTOs, and inward ports around user goals.  application-specific
Discuss not-found outcomes, transaction coordination, and authorisation entry points while  outcomes.
keeping domain rules in the model. Contrast application-specific workflow with transport-
specific concerns such as HTTP status codes.

Example: The example to build on

Given the calendar rejects overlapping dates.
When the application handles that outcome.
Then it does not save a successful change or decide its own alternative overlap policy.

Testing checkpoint

Test orchestration using real domain objects and substituted external ports.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Should the application use case return an HTTP response object to a command-line caller?

127
                             TRACK 06 / Introduce Clean Architecture naturally
                             STEP 30

                             The Infrastructure Layer

READING CUE                  The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover       The application needs the year retrieved and saved. Somebody must translate that request into
Identify technical adapters  database operations.
and distinguish their
behaviour from               Ideas to develop
business-policy decisions.
                             Place repository implementations, database mapping, transaction mechanisms, and external-
                             service adapters here. Discuss event delivery only when the optional event requirement is
                             enabled. Explain how storage constraints and version checks support the domain rather than
                             replace its expressive rules.

                             Example: The example to build on

                             Given a valid academic year is saved and later loaded.
                             When the infrastructure reconstructs the aggregate.
                             Then its terms and date values retain the intended meaning without treating loading as a new
                             scheduling event.

                             Testing checkpoint

                             Plan integration tests for round trips, constraints, concurrency conflicts, and rollback behaviour.

                             Try it: Explain before implementing

                             Why can a perfect in-memory fake still fail to reveal an incorrect database mapping?

                             128
TRACK 06 / Introduce Clean Architecture naturally
STEP 31

The Presentation Layer

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                                READING CUE

A web request contains text dates, while a command-line command contains arguments. Both                What you will discover
express the same calendar intention.                                                                    Explain inbound adapters
                                                                                                        and distinguish transport
Ideas to develop                                                                                        validation from scheduling
                                                                                                        decisions.
Translate transport input into application input and translate application results back to the caller.
Address date parsing, request shape, and useful error messages. Keep overlap logic out of
controllers. Explain that a frontend may offer helpful early validation without becoming the au-
thoritative domain boundary.

Example: The example to build on

Given an incoming date cannot be parsed.
When the presentation adapter reads the request.
Then it reports malformed input rather than constructing a misleading scheduling command.

Testing checkpoint

Test transport parsing and outcome translation separately from domain rule enforcement.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Why must the system still enforce rules when a user bypasses the web form?

129
                               TRACK 07 / Control dependency direction
                               STEP 32

                               The Dependency Rule

READING CUE                    The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover         The application calls a repository during execution. Does that mean its source code must import
Read dependency arrows         a database repository class?
correctly and separate
imports from execution order.  Ideas to develop

                               Draw source dependencies toward inner policies and distinguish them from a runtime sequence
                               diagram. Locate concrete object assembly at the outer composition boundary. Show how inter-
                               faces allow an inner use case to call outward without knowing outward implementation details.

                               Example: The example to build on

                               Given the application needs an AcademicYear repository.
                               When its source dependencies are inspected.
                               Then it refers to an inward contract rather than importing a concrete SQL adapter.

                               Testing checkpoint

                               Add a dependency check or focused review that detects an inward module importing infrastruc-
                               ture.

                               Try it: Explain before implementing

                               Can a runtime call point outward while a source-code dependency still points inward?

                               130
TRACK 07 / Control dependency direction
STEP 33

Dependency Inversion Through the
Repository

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                             READING CUE

The scheduling use case should collaborate with a repository without constructing a particular       What you will discover
database implementation.
                                                                                                     Explain dependency
Ideas to develop                                                                                     inversion, dependency
                                                                                                     injection, and the
Develop the relation Application to abstraction, with Infrastructure implementing that abstraction.  composition root using one
Explain injecting a concrete collaborator at assembly time. Distinguish the architectural inver-     repository.
sion from the technique used to provide an object; injecting a concrete database dependency
alone does not ensure inversion.

Example: The example to build on

Given a use case accepts a repository contract.
When the composition root supplies either an in-memory or a database implementation.
Then the use-case logic does not need to change its scheduling policy.

Testing checkpoint

Run the same application scenarios with a fake, then check the real adapter against the required
contract.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Why is constructor injection not the same thing as an entire dependency-inversion design?

131
                          TRACK 07 / Control dependency direction
                          STEP 34

                          Why the Domain Does Not Know About
                          the Database

READING CUE               The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover    A term's identity and an academic year's rules must make sense before the team chooses tables
Separate domain design    or an ORM.
from persistence mapping
and evaluate tradeoffs    Ideas to develop
without absolutism.
                          Compare persistence-independent domain objects with an Active Record-style design. Discuss
                          simple CRUD situations fairly, then explain why this teaching model isolates policy from storage.
                          Address identity mapping, reconstitution, and the difference between a persisted object and a
                          DDD entity.

                          Example: The example to build on

                          Given the repository reloads an existing academic year.
                          When the application asks it a scheduling question.
                          Then the answer follows domain rules rather than being defined by a database row's method
                          set.

                          Testing checkpoint

                          Keep domain tests free of database setup; test mapping and persistence semantics in integra-
                          tion.

                          Try it: Explain before implementing

                          Would removing ORM annotations automatically produce a well-modelled domain?

                          132
TRACK 07 / Control dependency direction
STEP 35

Walking Through the Entire Request

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                           READING CUE

The administrator reschedules Term 2 to start on 15 April. We now have names for every             What you will discover
responsibility involved.                                                                           Follow request, success,
                                                                                                   rejection, and commit failure
Ideas to develop                                                                                   across the architecture.

Trace presentation to application, repository loading, aggregate decision, persistence commit,
result mapping, and presentation response. Contrast the runtime path with the inward depen-
dency diagram. Include missing-year, invalid-period, overlap, concurrency conflict, and commit-
failure outcomes without reporting success prematurely.

Example: The example to build on

Given Term 2's proposed dates pass all domain rules.
When the persistence commit fails.
Then the caller is not told that the new calendar was successfully saved.

Testing checkpoint

Create a sequence-based test plan and distinguish unit-level failure simulations from real trans-
action tests.

Try it: Explain before implementing

At what exact point is the system entitled to report that the reschedule succeeded?

133
                              TRACK 08 / TDD across the architecture
                              STEP 36

                              Testing Value Objects

READING CUE                   The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover        A small error in inclusive dates can affect every term, so we revisit the smallest model with
Develop focused value-object  systematic examples.
tests and recognise
boundaries and useful         Ideas to develop
properties.
                              Extend the earlier TDD cycles with equality, immutability, inclusion, duration, overlap, and invalid
                              replacements. Introduce property-based thinking without requiring a new library. Examples
                              include overlap symmetry and a same-day range covering one day. Test behaviour, not the
                              decorator or internal representation used to implement it.

                              Example: The example to build on

                              Given two ranges are compared for overlap.
                              When their argument order is reversed.
                              Then the overlap result remains the same.

                              Testing checkpoint

                              Select one missing example, see the relevant failure, implement it, and refactor; do not retro-
                              spectively relabel all earlier tests as TDD.

                              Try it: Explain before implementing

                              Which boundaries would you test before trusting an inclusive duration calculation?

                              134
TRACK 08 / TDD across the architecture
STEP 37

Testing Entities and Aggregates

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                          READING CUE

The administrator makes several calendar changes. Every accepted state must remain coher-         What you will discover
ent, including after an unsuccessful request.                                                     Verify identity, shared
                                                                                                  invariants, and unchanged
Ideas to develop                                                                                  state after rejected
                                                                                                  operations.
Grow tests for scheduling, duplicate rejection, rescheduling, cross-year dates, term order, and
failed changes. Use business language and observable state. Distinguish a complete calendar
fixture from legal partial states, and test optional events only when that extension is enabled.

Example: The example to build on

Given Term 2 has an accepted period.
When a replacement starts on Term 1's last day.
Then the operation rejects it and retains the original term identity and period.

Testing checkpoint

Use arrange­act­assert to organise each example; explain that this structure is different from
the red­green­refactor development cycle.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Why should a rejection test verify the remaining state instead of only checking that an error
occurred?

135
                              TRACK 08 / TDD across the architecture
                              STEP 38

                              Testing Application Use Cases

READING CUE                   The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover        We want to test the scheduling workflow without starting a database for every business example.
Use appropriate test doubles
while retaining real domain   Ideas to develop
behaviour in use-case tests.
                              Introduce a repository fake, distinguish it from a stub or mock, and avoid replacing the aggre-
                              gate with a mock that cannot enforce its rules. Test success, not found, domain rejection, and
                              failed persistence. Explain the need for contract tests so a convenient fake does not promise
                              behaviour the real repository lacks.

                              Example: The example to build on

                              Given the fake repository contains the 2026 academic year.
                              When the application receives overlapping Term 2 dates.
                              Then it reports rejection without recording a successful new schedule.

                              Testing checkpoint

                              Prefer observable use-case outcomes to brittle assertions about every internal method call.

                              Try it: Explain before implementing

                              What bug could be hidden by mocking the aggregate's scheduling decision to always succeed?

                              136
TRACK 08 / TDD across the architecture
STEP 39

Testing Infrastructure Separately

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                        READING CUE

Two administrators load the same calendar version and both attempt to save. An in-memory        What you will discover
business-rule test cannot establish the database outcome.                                       Explain why mapping,
                                                                                                transactions, concurrency,
Ideas to develop                                                                                and delivery require real
                                                                                                integration evidence.
Plan isolated integration tests against the actual persistence technology: round trips, unique
identities, version conflicts, rollback, and transaction boundaries. Where events are enabled,
test outbox persistence and retry safety. Keep setup deterministic and distinguish these tests
from a fake-only application test.

Example: The example to build on

Given two sessions load the same academic year version.
When one commits and the other submits a stale save.
Then the chosen concurrency strategy prevents silently overwriting the committed change.

Testing checkpoint

Reproduce the competing saves with independent sessions and verify the final stored state, not
only the exception.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Which infrastructure guarantees are impossible to prove with only a repository fake?

137
                               TRACK 08 / TDD across the architecture
                               STEP 40

                               The Different Tests Answer Different
                               Questions

READING CUE                    The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover         A correct date calculation, a correct workflow, and a working deployed request are related but
Distinguish domain,            different claims.
application, integration, and
end-to-end tests and use       Ideas to develop
each deliberately.
                               Map risks to test boundaries: domain rules, use-case coordination, adapter behaviour, and an
                               assembled user journey. Explain why higher-level tests do not replace focused examples and
                               why terminology varies between teams. Revisit TDD as a way of developing behaviour, not a
                               synonym for a particular test layer.

                               Example: The example to build on

                               Given the domain correctly rejects an overlap.
                               When the web adapter mistakenly reports success.
                               Then domain tests can pass while a presentation or end-to-end check reveals the integration
                               defect.

                               Testing checkpoint

                               Assign each major failure mode to the narrowest test that can expose it, with a small number of
                               complete journey tests.

                               Try it: Explain before implementing

                               Which test would first reveal a broken JSON field name, and which would reveal a shared-day
                               overlap bug?

                               138
TRACK 09 / Put the whole system together
STEP 41

One Business Rule Through Every Layer

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                          READING CUE

Return to the original conflict: Term 1 ends on 28 March and the requested Term 2 start is also   What you will discover
28 March.                                                                                         Trace one policy from
                                                                                                  conversation to model,
Ideas to develop                                                                                  execution, persistence, and
                                                                                                  feedback.
Follow the rule through a stakeholder statement, boundary example, failing test, aggregate
decision, application outcome, and useful user message. Include the role of storage consistency
without duplicating domain policy everywhere. Distinguish where a rule is authoritative from the
many places its outcome is represented.

Example: The example to build on

Given Term 1 includes 28 March 2026.
When the user requests that same date for Term 2's start.
Then the change is rejected, nothing invalid is persisted, and the caller receives a meaningful
explanation.

Testing checkpoint

Build a traceability chain linking the rule to domain, application, and selected end-to-end evi-
dence.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Does tracing one rule through several layers mean each layer should independently implement
it?

139
                             TRACK 09 / Put the whole system together
                             STEP 42

                             DDD vs Clean Architecture vs TDD

READING CUE                  The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover       The team has used three approaches in one project. Students need to explain their relationship
Explain the distinct         without treating them as interchangeable labels.
contributions of modelling,
dependency design, and       Ideas to develop
test-driven development.
                             Compare DDD's model and language, Clean Architecture's dependency boundaries, and TDD's
                             incremental feedback cycle. Use the same rescheduling example for all three. Discuss how
                             each can be practised without the others and why their combination still requires judgement
                             and conversations about the domain.

                             Example: The example to build on

                             Given an overlap example reveals a missing rule.
                             When the team develops and places the resulting behaviour.
                             Then DDD informs meaning, TDD guides the small development steps, and architecture pro-
                             tects the policy's dependencies.

                             Testing checkpoint

                             Ask students to identify which concern each design decision addresses and what evidence
                             would support it.

                             Try it: Explain before implementing

                             Could a thoroughly tested four-layer application still misunderstand the school's calendar?

                             140
TRACK 09 / Put the whole system together
STEP 43

Common Misunderstandings

The SchoolGrid situation                                                                              READING CUE

A student proposes a repository for every class, a service for every operation, and microservices     What you will discover
because the project uses DDD.                                                                         Challenge pattern checklists
                                                                                                      and justify decisions using
Ideas to develop                                                                                      the SchoolGrid rules.

Revisit class versus entity, entity versus aggregate root, value object versus identifier, DTO
versus domain object, and domain service versus application service. Address repository and
projection boundaries, legitimate application logic, optional patterns, and the fact that folders or
microservices do not establish DDD or Clean Architecture.

Example: The example to build on

Given DateRange is a useful domain class.
When someone concludes it needs an identity and repository.
Then the team asks what business requirement would justify those additions rather than accept-
ing the checklist.

Testing checkpoint

Use counterexamples from earlier steps and ask which existing tests would expose a harmful
redesign.

Try it: Explain before implementing

Which abstraction would you deliberately omit from the smallest useful version of SchoolGrid,
and why?

141
                              TRACK 09 / Put the whole system together
                              STEP 44

                              The Complete SchoolGrid Mental Model

READING CUE                   The SchoolGrid situation

What you will discover        The administrator asks one final question: how does the system let us change dates while
Explain the entire design as  keeping the calendar trustworthy?
a connected response to the
school's needs and evaluate   Ideas to develop
a new rule.
                              Connect values, identity, aggregate boundaries, use cases, repositories, DTOs, adapters, de-
                              pendency direction, and the test strategy in one account. Mark services, dedicated factories,
                              and external events as choices justified by extensions, not mandatory decorations. End with a
                              fresh business change rather than a catalogue of definitions.

                              Example: The example to build on

                              Given the school proposes allowing a term to cross into the next calendar year.
                              When students analyse the change before modifying code.
                              Then they identify the affected policy, examples, and model assumptions without automatically
                              redesigning every layer.

                              Testing checkpoint

                              Write the next failing example, identify the responsible model boundary, and explain which re-
                              gression and integration tests still matter.

                              Try it: Explain before implementing

                              Can you explain every major abstraction by naming the problem it solves and one simpler alter-
                              native?

                              142
Author's checklist

      · Does the section begin with a school problem rather than a pattern definition?
      · Is each policy agreed for this teaching school or explicitly hypothetical?
      · Do examples cover acceptance, rejection, and significant boundaries?
      · Is each responsibility justified before its technical name is introduced?
      · Are test-first development and later regression checking distinguished?
      · Are optional abstractions and credible simpler alternatives visible?
      · Does the next section follow naturally from an unresolved question?

                                                                 143
Authoring with the teaching toolkit

All ten additions are reusable. The standalone student example booklet and instructor example booklet
demonstrate them using a reservation story. This section shows the authoring syntax.

       Connect evidence to rules

1 \begin{conversation}{When does a hold expire?}
2 \utterance{msg:time}{Business expert}{After 48 hours.}
3 \end{conversation}
4 \begin{businessrule}{br:hold}{Limit the hold}
5 A reservation lasts 48 hours.
6 \evidence{\msgref{msg:time}.}
7 \end{businessrule}

Use unique label keys. Message and rule numbers follow the step automatically. Use \msgref and
\ruleref for clickable references.

       Make a model revision visible

1 \begin{modelevolution}{Clarify identity}
2 \BeforeModel{One flag per title.}
3 \NewEvidence{Copies have separate barcodes.}
4 \AfterModel{Use \modelchange{Copy identity}.}
5 \end{modelevolution}
6 \begin{misconception}{Storage implies identity}
7 \Mistaken{Every stored row is a domain entity.}
8 \Reconsider{Ask what identity means to the business.}
9 \end{misconception}
For SchoolGrid, the same pattern can show the shift from editing dates independently to validating the
calendar as a whole. Label hypothetical changes explicitly.

                                                                 144
                                                                                                                                                145

       Accept, test, and link the implementation

 1 \begin{acceptancetest}{at:boundary}{At expiry}{\ruleref{br:hold}}
 2 \Given{an existing reservation ending at 09:00.}
 3 \When{a member requests the copy at exactly 09:00.}
 4 \Then{the request succeeds.}
 5 \automatedby{CopyExamples.acceptsAtExactExpiry()}
 6 \end{acceptancetest}
 7 \testref{at:boundary}
 8 \begin{companioncode}{Example}{snapshot-v1}
 9 \companionlink{code/Copy.java}{Open domain source}
10 \end{companioncode}

External code listings print the source that actually runs. A checksum manifest identifies the distributed
snapshot. Local file links need the code folder beside the PDF; replace their target with a real hosted
URL when you publish one.

       Add behaviour diagrams

 1 \begin{figure}[H]
 2 \centering
 3 \input{diagrams/reservation-sequence}
 4 \caption{A request passing through the model.}
 5 \end{figure}
 6 % Also available: diagrams/reservation-state.tex

Use the supplied TikZ styles for participants, lifelines, messages, returns, states, and transitions. Keep
class diagrams for structure, sequence diagrams for collaborations, and state diagrams for lifecycle
behavior.

       Close the learning loop

 1 \begin{checkpoint}
 2 \checkpointitem{Rules agreed}{Name the rules.}
 3 \checkpointitem{Explain}{Justify the model boundary.}
 4 \checkpointitem{Unresolved}{Record the next question.}
 5 \end{checkpoint}
146                            Step 44. The Complete SchoolGrid Model

     One source, two editions

1 \begin{solution}{Exercise title}
2 Explain the reasoning behind a possible solution.
3 \end{solution}
4 \begin{instructornote}{Teaching prompt}
5 Add a discussion question or assessment rubric.
6 \end{instructornote}

Both environments are omitted entirely in a student build. The wrapper selects the instructor edition

before loading the manuscript. Use an external \lstinputlisting for code inside hidden content;

inline verbatim listings are not supported in these captured environments.

       Define once, find everywhere

1 % In glossary.tex:
2 \DeclareDDDConcept{entity}{Entity}{An object with identity.}
3 % In ordinary prose:
4 \dddterm{entity} % glossary link and index entry
5 \dddnote{entity} % margin definition and index entry
6 % In the back-matter glossary:
7 \glossaryentry{entity}
8 % For any additional index topic:
9 \index{UML!sequence diagram}

Definitions in glossary.tex are shared by the margin and glossary. Add new entries to the printed
glossary in alphabetical order. Each use of \dddterm or \dddnote records its page in the index. Plain,

unmarked occurrences are not indexed automatically. Examples: Entity, Aggregate, Value object.

       Cite and build

Use \cite{evans2015} to produce a reference such as Evans [2]. Add bibliography entries to
references.bib. The Gherkin example follows Cucumber's reference [1]; Fowler gives additional

context for bounded contexts [3].

Run .\build.ps1 to compile the example editions, bibliography, index, and runnable code. Add -
Target Book to build SchoolGrid, or -Target All for both. The script uses LuaLaTeX, BibTeX, and

MakeIndex.
TRACK 09 / Put the whole system together

DDD glossary

These short teaching definitions are used consistently in margin notes and prose. For the broader
pattern vocabulary, consult Evans [2].
Aggregate
A consistency boundary around domain objects. Its root controls changes and protects invariants.
Aggregate root
The entity through which external callers access and change an aggregate.
Bounded context
A boundary within which one domain model and its language have a consistent meaning.
Domain event
An immutable record of a domain-significant fact that has already happened.
Entity
An object with a continuing identity, even when its attributes change.
Factory
An operation or object that creates valid domain objects while hiding construction details.
Invariant
A condition the model must preserve at its consistency boundary.
Repository
A collection-like interface for retrieving and persisting aggregate roots while hiding storage details.
Ubiquitous language
Shared domain language used by experts and developers within a bounded context.
Value object
An immutable description defined by its values, with no independent identity.

                                                                 147
References and further reading

[1] Cucumber. Gherkin reference. https://cucumber.io/docs/gherkin/reference/. Ac-

     cessed 7 September 2026.
[2] Eric Evans. Domain-driven design reference: Definitions and pattern summaries. Domain Lan-

    guage. https://www.domainlanguage.com/ddd/reference/, 2015. Accessed 7 September

     2026.

[3] Martin Fowler. Bounded context. https://martinfowler.com/bliki/BoundedContext.
    html, 2014. 15 January 2014. Accessed 7 September 2026.

                                                                 148
Concept index

Aggregate, 83, 126
Aggregate root, 91
Bounded context, 17
Domain event, 96
Entity, 126
Factory, 95
Invariant, 92
Repository, 97
Ubiquitous language, 17
Value object, 33, 126

                                                                 149
